

===== PAGE 1 =====
ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
published: 01 July 2014
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2014.00064
Memory consolidation from seconds to weeks: a
three-stage neural network model with autonomous
reinstatement dynamics
Florian Fiebig 1,2 and Anders Lansner 1,3*
1 Department of Computational Biology, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm, Sweden
2 Institute for Adaptive and Neural Computation, School of Informatics, Edinburgh University, Edinburgh, Scotland
3 Department of Numerical Analysis and Computer Science, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden
Edited by:
Mayank R. Mehta, University of
California Los Angeles, USA
Reviewed by:
Goren Gordon, Weizmann Institute
of Science, Israel
Emili Balaguer-Ballester,
Bournemouth University, UK
*Correspondence:
Anders Lansner, Department of
Computational Biology, Royal
Institute of Technology (KTH),
Lindstedtsvägen 24,
Stockholm 100 44, Sweden
e-mail: ala@kth.se
Declarative long-term memories are not created in an instant. Gradual stabilization
and temporally shifting dependence of acquired declarative memories in different brain
regions—called systems consolidation—can be tracked in time by lesion experiments.
The observation of temporally graded retrograde amnesia (RA) following hippocampal
lesions points to a gradual transfer of memory from hippocampus to neocortical long-term
memory. Spontaneous reactivations of hippocampal memories, as observed in place cell
reactivations during slow-wave-sleep, are supposed to drive neocortical reinstatements
and facilitate this process. We propose a functional neural network implementation of
these ideas and furthermore suggest an extended three-state framework that includes
the prefrontal cortex (PFC). It bridges the temporal chasm between working memory
percepts on the scale of seconds and consolidated long-term memory on the scale of
weeks or months. We show that our three-stage model can autonomously produce the
necessary stochastic reactivation dynamics for successful episodic memory consolidation.
The resulting learning system is shown to exhibit classical memory effects seen in
experimental studies, such as retrograde and anterograde amnesia (AA) after simulated
hippocampal lesioning; furthermore the model reproduces peculiar biological ﬁndings
on memory modulation, such as retrograde facilitation of memory after suppressed
acquisition of new long-term memories—similar to the effects of benzodiazepines on
memory.
Keywords: memory consolidation, working memory, complementary learning systems, synaptic depression,
neural adaptation, retrograde amnesia, anterograde amnesia, retrograde facilitation, computational model
INTRODUCTION
Memories for facts and events are not acquired in their def-
inite form. Rather, some post-learning processes are known
to take place that gradually stabilize new memories. It is
generally accepted that neocortex provides a slow learning
substrate for distributed long-term memories. Fast working
memory, capable of immediate one-shot learning, has been
localized around the PFC ( Jacobsen, 1936; Fuster, 2008 ). The
discourse on declarative memory consolidation has, however,
been largely centered around the hippocampus and vari-
ous substructures of the wider medial temporal lobe (MTL),
which store memories on an intermediate timescale, and
thus are perfectly situated to moderate the consolidation
process.
Any eventual declarative long-term memory existed at its ear-
liest stage in PFC as working memory, next in the MTL, and
ﬁnally in the hippocampally-independent neocortical long-term
memory, so multiple brain areas are thought to support declara-
tive memory throughout its lifetime. As memory is transitionally
stored in memory systems of very different capacity and plas-
ticity, a holistic model of declarative memory must ﬁnd a way
to interlink the involved networks functionally, using the avail-
able biological data about phenomenology as well as anatomical
structures and neurophysiology.
In this paper, we will focus on mechanistic systems level
modeling of this remarkable feature of human memory, namely
the enormous temporal chasm (seconds to decades) bridged by
the memory consolidation process and the neural mechanisms
behind it.
After a brief Introduction of the Complementary Learning
Systems (CLS) framework and biological evidence for consolida-
tion through reactivations/replay, we lay down four challenges,
which we see as important to address in modeling memory
consolidation.
The Model and Method section introduces our three-stage
concept, then the formal network model, followed by the full
memory consolidation model with its different components
and simulation cycle. W e establish our performance metric and
present our method for simulating hippocampal lesions.
In the Results section, we highlight some key simulation results
including autonomous memory consolidation, lesion-induced
amnesia effects and two memory modulation experiments, which
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org July 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 64 | 1
COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE

===== PAGE 2 =====
Fiebig and Lansner Memory consolidation through autonomous reinstatement
follow a range of different memory phenomena typical to the
mammalian, declarative memory system.
After attempting to validate our computational memory con-
solidation model by contrasting it against biological evidence in
this way, we discuss the broader implications this has for the
CLS framework and future computational memory consolidation
models, as well as contradictory biological evidence and possible
augmentations of the model.
ORIGINS OF THE CLS FRAMEWORK
The study of memory systems consolidation has resulted in sev-
eral computational and neural network models of increasing
reﬁnement (McNaughton and Morris, 1987; Alvarez and Squire,
1994; Wilson and McNaughton, 1994; McClelland et al., 1995;
Shen and McNaughton, 1996; McClelland, 1998; Hasselmo and
McClelland, 1999; Wittenberg et al., 2002; Norman and O’Reilly,
2003; Walker and Russo, 2004; Roxin and Fusi, 2013 ), which
have largely conﬁrmed the idea that a composition of multiple
interacting learning systems is both useful and necessary for repli-
cating many aspects of human memory including recognition
memory data.
The hippocampus was established to play a major role in the
process of memory consolidation most notably by the case of
Patient HM ( Milner, 1972) and various animal lesion studies by
Zola-Morgan et al. ( Squire and Zola-Morgan, 1985, 1991; Zola-
Morgan and Squire, 1990; Squire, 1992). Patients with lesions not
only exhibit severe anterograde amnesia (AA) but also temporally
graded retrograde amnesia (RA), primarily affecting recent—not
yet consolidated—memories ( Zola-Morgan and Squire, 1985 ).
Non-declarative types of memory, such as priming, motor, or
perceptual learning are not affected by hippocampal lesion-
ing and are thought to be reliant on other brain regions and
mechanisms.
Functionally, structures of the MTL memory system, in partic-
ular the hippocampus, are believed to form an anatomical index.
Distributed neocortical activations of an event are thereby bound
together into a coherent memory trace or encoded in a more suit-
able form than the neocortical activation itself, achieving strong
pattern separation and recall performance. High plasticity in the
hippocampus facilitates fast learning while granting the neo-
cortex the time necessary to integrate new memories into the
preexisting structure of older long-term memories. With pro-
gressing systems consolidation, memories become hippocampally
independent over time.
It has been suggested that working memory performance may
be aided by hippocampus/MTL, especially for relational process-
ing ( Olson et al., 2006; Graham et al., 2010 ), but more recent
studies reveal that working memory performance remains unaf-
fected by hippocampal and even wider MTL lesions if the capacity
requirements of the task do not exceed a narrowly deﬁned work-
ing memory capacity ( Jeneson et al., 2010; Jeneson and Squire,
2012). This evidence lends itself to two conclusions: First, work-
ing memory itself is independent of the hippocampus. Second,
the hippocampus may still aid working memory by extending the
available capacity.
Increasingly precise hypotheses ( Eichenbaum et al., 2011 )
about functionally distinct roles of different structures
surrounding the hippocampal area (e.g., perirhinal cortex
and parahippocampal region) in recollection vs. familiarity and
in encoding direct or indirect relationships between items and
contexts, warrants the use of the wider term MTL rather than
treating intermediate memory function as a mere hippocampal
issue. However, the scope of analysis for this paper rests on
associative recall and discussion of larger brain area interactions,
so here we refrain from a detailed breakdown of MTL subareas.
Based on the theoretical consideration of incremental learning
in artiﬁcial neural networks (McClelland et al., 1995; McClelland,
1998), it was concluded that the existence of at least two CLS
appears to be necessary. Such a two-stage CLS serves an adaptive
function and allows for processes of selective learning, memory
strength modulation, and gradual acquisition into stable long-
term memory without sacriﬁcing one-shot learning capability.
Most memory models concerned with hippocampal-
neocortical interaction (e.g., Alvarez and Squire, 1994;
McClelland et al., 1995; Murre, 1996; Wittenberg et al., 2002 )
account for the different time-course of memory formation in
hippocampus and neocortex by assuming fast synaptic plasticity
in hippocampus and much slower, gradual modiﬁcations in neo-
cortex. Attractor states are quickly learned in the hippocampal
network and then later used to spread components of the asso-
ciation in the neocortex. In this view, hippocampus effectively
acts as a teacher to neocortex and has also been described as a
training-trial-multiplier (Norman et al., 2005).
Sleep and its various phases have been proposed to modu-
late network dynamics and plasticity, thus promoting this sup-
posed two-phase memory consolidation process ( Wilson and
McNaughton, 1994; Qin et al., 1997; Buzsáki, 1998 ), whereby
interference between new learning (awake) and consolidation
(asleep) is avoided. Especially with respect to sequential memo-
ries, recurring reactivations have also been called replay.
REACTIVATION/REPLAY
Spontaneous reactivations (or replay) have repeatedly been
observed in the hippocampus, but also in other brain areas, such
as PFC ( Euston et al., 2007; Peyrache et al., 2009 ). Large ensem-
bles ( Louie and Wilson, 2001; Lee and Wilson, 2002 )o fp l a c e
cells in the rat hippocampus were found to reactivate during
REM-sleep and particularly slow-wave sleep (SWS) in a con-
sistent sequential order similar to prior wake state activations.
Especially SWS reactivations were shown to co-occur with brief
(30–120 ms), irregular sharp-waves/ripples (SWR) at 100–250 Hz
in the local ﬁeld potential ( Buzsáki et al., 1983, 1992; Buzsáki,
1986). During a SWR event, a small fraction of neurons in the
CA3-CA1 subicular complex/entorhinal cortex discharge syn-
chronously in powerful population bursts ( Sullivan et al., 2011 ).
The resulting neural events might reach far away to associated cor-
tical areas to induce L TP . The number of reactivation events have
been repeatedly linked to memory performance in many tasks
such as spatial learning ( Dupret et al., 2010 ), odor-reward asso-
ciation learning, and retrieval from remote memory ( Eschenko
et al., 2008 ). The amnesic effects of targeted replay interrup-
tion via electrical stimulation (Girardeau et al., 2009; Ego-Stengel
and Wilson, 2010 ) suggest that this link is causal, not merely
correlational.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org July 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 64 | 2

===== PAGE 3 =====
Fiebig and Lansner Memory consolidation through autonomous reinstatement
FOUR CHALLENGES TO MODELING
I nt h ef o l l o w i n g ,w el a yo u tf o u rm a j o rc h a l l e n g e sw h i c hw es e e
as critical for the advancement of a more complete model of
memory consolidation and aim to address with our model.
Autonomous replay
Despite the fact that reinstatement is a critical component of
the supposed consolidation process, surprisingly few neural net-
work models ( Norman et al., 2005 ) concerned with memory
consolidation consider how an artiﬁcial neural network might be
adapted such that continuous replay activity becomes an emer-
gent system property, and could be harnessed for autonomous
long-term memory consolidation dynamics in hippocampal-
neocortical interaction. The basic problem can be described like
this:
Attractor neural networks are commonly used to store mem-
ories in computational models of cortical memory ( Lansner,
2009). Such an approach is justiﬁed on the grounds of obser-
vation of attractors in hippocampus and neocortex. For exam-
ple, the rich collateral connectivity in the hippocampal CA3
region can be modeled as an associative feedback matrix ( Marr,
1970, 1971; McNaughton and Morris, 1987; T reves and Rolls,
1994). This usually results in ﬁxed-point attractor dynamics,
and the major issue with modeling replay under these condi-
t i o n si st h a ta c t i v i t yi si n h e r e n t l ys t a b l eo n c ei th a sc o n v e r g e d .
Consequently, most computational models of the consolidation
process impose a scheme of repeated random noise bursts (Murre,
1996; Wittenberg et al., 2002; Walker and Russo, 2004; Roxin
and Fusi, 2013 ), predetermined activation patterns ( Alvarez and
Squire, 1994 ), or externally regulated subcortical disinhibition
(Bibbig, 1996 ), designed to take the system out of its current
attractor state and thus cue the reactivation of another previ-
ously learned attractor. Often, even papers speciﬁcally concerned
with modeling “ spontaneous reactivatio n” do not implement an
intrinsic neural mechanism for spontaneous reinstatement, but
use noise.
W e believe that computational memory models need to
include a functional and biologically plausible intrinsic mecha-
nism of replay that can facilitate autonomous replay and thus
drive consolidation. Consequently the model presented in this
paper uses an attractor network capable of autonomous replay,
describes some of its characteristics and uses these to functionally
drive a consolidation mechanism.
Inclusion of working memory
As of today, the CLS framework has no account of working
memory and its many implementations—successful as they may
be in other respects—have thus notoriously neglected it in the
modeling effort. This is unfortunate, as hippocampal (or MTL,
as the model may have it) memory trace formation is con-
sequently assumed to be automatic, near instantaneous (i.e.,
one-shot learning), and largely synonymous with working mem-
ory when it comes to acquisition ( Norman, 2010 ). Even simple
word list learning demonstrates, however, that not every ﬂeeting
percept automatically acquires a lasting episodic memory trace
in HIP/MTL supporting recall. Serial position effects in these
kinds of memory tests (primacy and recency), ﬁrst described
by Hermann Ebbinghaus at the end of the Nineteenth Century,
reveal a time-dependent consolidation process at work in the
formation of a lasting memory trace susceptible to attention, rel-
evance, and conscious reﬂection. Only then can the consolidated
hippocampal trace itself later drive long-term systems consolida-
tion into neocortex. Each network effectively acts as a teacher
to the next and in this sense, we aim to test the viability of a
consolidation-chain, comparable to more theoretical multi-stage
network models recently proposed by Roxin and Fusi (2013).W e
believe that the inclusion of working memory into CLS, in what-
ever fashion, is a critical step toward addressing the issue. T oward
this goal, we implement a very fast learning network of exceed-
ingly limited capacity (supporting recall of about ﬁve to seven
recent items/attractors), mimicking pre-frontal working memory
functionality.
Temporal scope of systems consolidation
Biological data on the time course of systems consolidation is
abundant in RA and AA gradients following hippocampal lesion-
ing ( Winocur, 1990; Kim and Fanselow, 1992 ) and studies on
humans with impaired MTL ( Zola-Morgan et al., 1986; Jeneson
et al., 2010 ). Many neural network models of memory exist,
replicating numerous aspects of human memory, yet the full tem-
poral scope of memory consolidation from working memory to
long-term memory has not been addressed adequately.
W e believe this is in large part because it is hard to model
mechanistically. The temporal scales on which working mem-
ory, intermediate memory, and long-term memory operate are
separated by many orders of magnitude in time. On-line learn-
ing rules for artiﬁcial neural networks used in memory modeling
need to reﬂect this in their time constants. A further compli-
cation is simulation runtime: Even without signiﬁcant scaling
(toward biologically reasonable network size), simulations of
systems consolidation spanning weeks or months almost imme-
diately result in prohibitively long simulation runtimes, especially
if neural dynamics are simulated at the resolution of a few
milliseconds.
W e believe the temporal scope of real memory needs to be
addressed in computational modeling attempts. With this objec-
tive in mind, we implement plasticity time constants ranging
from minutes to days, which may not cover the needed span
entirely, but allows a comparison with actual learning/amnesia
curves in rodents (see Figure 9) and is meant as a serious step
toward such a memory system.
Catastrophic Forgetting
Catastrophic Forgetting (CF) is a common problem in attrac-
tor memory networks. Without special attention to the learning
rule, the tendency of many kinds of neural networks is to even-
tually forget previous information abruptly upon learning new
information. As such, CF is a radical manifestation of the so
called stability-plasticity dilemma. While the principled division
of labor proposed by the CLS model improves the trade-off
between stability and plasticity drastically, as networks can spe-
cialize in either high stability or high plasticity, it still cannot
fundamentally solve the problem by itself. A dedicated stable,
long-term network with large capacity will delay the onset of CF ,
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org July 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 64 | 3

===== PAGE 4 =====
Fiebig and Lansner Memory consolidation through autonomous reinstatement
but at its core, the network learning rule must allow the network
to forget as dynamically as it learns or CF will eventually become
ap r o b l e m .
W e believe that a functional memory system should be able
to learn and forget indeﬁnitely and that addressing CF is critical
in improving the biological plausibility of artiﬁcial neural net-
works for human memory models. T oward this goal, our model
implements a memory process that can keep learning/forgetting
indeﬁnitely and effectively addresses the issue of CF from a
theoretical and functional vantage point.
MODEL AND METHODS
THREE-STAGE MODEL
Based on our own previous work and inspired by the CLS frame-
work, ( McClelland et al., 1995; Norman et al., 2005; Norman,
2010)w eb u i l tat h r e e - s t a g em e m o r ys y s t e m(Figure 1), also
incorporating hippocampally independent and more short-lived
working memory. The formal model will be described in the
next section, detailed network and simulation parameters can be
found in Ta b l e s 1 , 2. Time constants are estimations rather than
being based on neurobiological data. In that sense, they constitute
model predictions.
The ﬁrst population, modeling the PFC, has the small-
est size (50 units) but features the fastest learning with a
time-constant τ
L = 3 min. This design is supposed to mimic
short-term memory and comprise the substrate for working
memory as well: A rapid memory system, capable of learn-
ing from single examples, but forgetting equally fast, result-
ing in highly limited capacity. It should be noted that the
hypothesized short-term memory mechanism is synaptic rather
than of a more standard persistent activity type. It is based
on fast expressing and volatile Hebbian synaptic plasticity and
modulated intrinsic excitability ( Sandberg et al., 2003; Mongillo
et al., 2008 ). Current biological data on fast forms of synap-
tic plasticity as well as intrinsic excitability modulation suggest
that such a mechanism of short-term memory is indeed a pos-
sibility ( Fransén et al., 2006; Lee et al., 2009; Lansner et al.,
2013). This suggests that the widely different temporal charac-
teristics of cortical memory systems are mainly due to plasticity
with a corresponding spectrum of time constants. This network
uses a kind of columnar coding, which is described in the next
section.
The second population (250 units), modeling the
intermediate-term hippocampal memory system (which
might anatomically involve close-by areas of the MTL such as
the perirhinal cortex and parahippocampal area), is ﬁve times
larger and much slower learning with time-constant τ
L = 3h .
This network is modeled without hypercolumns and in this case,
a k-winner-take-all (kWTA) mechanism is used to produce a
sparse and distributed representation, this is further described in
the Pattern Representation section.
The last population (CTX) models a large (500 units) and
slow learning (τ
L = 6 days) neocortical long-term memory, with
columnar structure. It is obviously hard to teach a memory
system this slow learning anything without either massive repe-
tition, or internal reinstatement dynamics. Note, that without the
use of additional metaplasicity in synaptic learning ( Fusi et al.,
2005), time constants probably need to span this wide range to
FIGURE 1 | The three-stage memory model: from prefrontal short-term memory to long-term neocortical memory . Activity in cortical areas (PFC, CTX)
is organized into hypercolumns, while HIP activity is sparser, pattern-separated, and lacks columnar organization.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org July 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 64 | 4

===== PAGE 5 =====
Fiebig and Lansner Memory consolidation through autonomous reinstatement
T able 1 | Network parameters.
Parameter Symbol [unit] PFC HIP CTX PFC-to-
HIP
HIP-to-
CTX
Network size N 50 250 500
Number of hypercolumns H 5 – 50
Activity level (sparsity) A 10% 5% 10%
Learning time constant
-corresponds to (scaled):
τL [ms] 8 400 18,500 20 20
3[ m i n ] 3[ h ] 6[ d a y s ] 9[ m i n ] 9[ m i n ]
Association gain g L 11 1 1 1
Adaptation time constant τA [ms] 160 400 – – –
Adaptation gain g A –1 .2 –0.8 – – –
Recall detection threshold * /Theta1 0.093 0.252 0.383 – –
SIMULA TION PHASES
Learning phase name Perception Reﬂection Sleep
Length 3 [steps] 52 [steps] 165 [steps]
-corresponds to (scaled): 13 [min] 3.8 [h] 12 [h]
GENERAL P ARAMETERS
Membrane time constant τC [ms] 1
Intrinsic noise rate λ0 0.025
Hypercolumn size M i [units] 10
*Near zero recall rates of unstudied patterns 352–360 (0 Days old inFigure 7) demonstrate that the classiﬁcation thresholds on the recall distance are not too loose,
generating barely any false positives.
T able 2 | Projection parameters during different simulation phases.
Perception Reﬂection Sleep Recall
PFC g L 11 0 1
τL [ms] 5 ∞ 5 ∞
gA − 1. 2 − 1. 2 0 0
τA [ms] 120 120 ∞∞
gPFC2HIP 01 0 0
gPFC2CTX 01 0 0
HIP g L 10 1 1
τL [ms] 400 400 ∞∞
gA − 0.8 0 − 0.8 0
τA [ms] 400 ∞ 400 ∞
gHIP2CTX 00 1 0
CTX g L 10 0 1
τL [ms] 18.500 18.500 18.500 ∞
gCTX2PFC 10 0 1
gCTX2HIP 10 0 1
Note that inﬁnite time constants denote no learning of this projection during that
particular phase, e.g., no learning occurs during recall.
even approach biologically plausible timescales between working
memory and stable long-term memory.
FORMAL MODEL
W e use an auto-associative Bayesian Conﬁdence Propagation
Neural Network (BCPNN) ( Sandberg et al., 2002, 2003 )w i t h
adapting non-spiking units modeling cortical minicolumns
representing a local sub-population of some 100 neurons
(Buxhoeveden and Casanova, 2002 ). These are further bundled
into soft-winner-take all (soft-WTA) modules referred to as
hypercolumns ( Kanter, 1988; Favorov and Diamond, 1990 ). A
normalizing lateral feedback inhibition within the hypercolumn
is assumed to be mediated by inhibitory basket cells. Previous
studies of this type of modular network have demonstrated
their excellent functional capabilities as associative memories
(Johansson and Lansner, 2007a,b ) including the ability to repli-
cate primacy, recency, and serial recall effects in human imme-
diate free recall ( Lansner et al., 2013 ). W e have further shown
that when we replace the abstract non-spiking units in such a
network with more biophysical ly detailed spiking model neu-
rons, we can successfully reproduce several experimental key
phenomena in memory recall, like nested oscillatory dynam-
ics and spontaneous reactivation ( Lundqvist et al., 2006, 2010,
2011). All units are connected with associative weights (stored
in weight matrix w), using incremental Hebbian learning with
a time constant τ
L (Sandberg et al., 2002 ) which can be varied
to accommodate different levels of plasticity. Cellular adapta-
t i o na n dd e p r e s s i n gs y n a p s e sw e r em o d e l e db yu s eo fa na d d i -
tional projection between neurons with a negative gain and its
own learning time constant τ
A, which was given a value of
160 ms. This projection abstractly models both the decay rate of
slow after-hyperpolarization in a previous biophysically detailed
pyramidal cell model ( Fransén and Lansner, 1995; Sandberg
and Lansner, 2002 ) and synaptic depression on the same time
scale ( Markram et al., 1997; Lundqvist et al., 2006 ). Cellular
adaptation and synaptic depression are prominent features of
biological cortical pyramidal cells ( Adelman et al., 2012 )a n d
synapses connecting pyramidal cells in cortex ( Lanting et al.,
2013).
The network is simulated in time steps of 10 ms. Each unit
i belongs to a hypercolumn of size M,a n d H(i) deﬁnes the set
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org July 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 64 | 5

===== PAGE 6 =====
Fiebig and Lansner Memory consolidation through autonomous reinstatement
of units in the same hypercolumn. The support h of each unit
is computed via the update Equation (1), where gL denotes the
gain of the auto-associative projection and gA denotes the gain
of the adaptation projection. V alues for these and other model
parameters are found in Ta b l e 1.T h eo u t p u t , ˆπ
j(t)o ft h e s e
units, a measure for neural activity, is then computed in Equation
(2), which also achieves the aforementioned hypercolumnar nor-
malization. In Equations (3)–(4), the current activity is used to
update rate estimates for units /Lambda1
i and connections /Lambda1ij.T h r o u g h
temporal ﬁltering with a learning time constant, these represent
heuristically estimated probabilities which are consistent with
prior information. These running average rate estimates are then
used to compute biasβ, as well as synaptic weights w in Equations
(5)–(6). While this paper cannot motivate the entire derivation
of the BCPNN learning rule, it should not go unmentioned that
these equations were originally derived from a naive Bayesian
classiﬁer (so the weight is a joint activity rate estimate divided
by the unit rate estimates). A minimal noise background activity
λ
0, impacts how strong/weak the correlation measures between
units (as encoded by the weights) can become. It essentially guar-
antees an upper and lower bound on the weight, avoids underﬂow
(as we use the logarithmic weight during the update) and weight
stability in the absence of input. The membrane time-constant
τ
c is set to 1. The adaptation bias γ and adaptation weights
v are activity dependent as well and the exact same Hebbian-
Bayesian learning rule applied to the original associative projec-
tion is used for the adaptation projection (Equations 7–10)—with
the important distinction that adaptation acts on a different
timescale, so the rate estimates μ
i and μij are computed on the
timescale of τA.
τC
dhj(t)
dt = gL
⎡
⎣βj(t)+
∑
k
log
⎛
⎝
Mk∑
iϵH(k)
wij(t)ˆπi(t)
⎞
⎠
⎤
⎦ (1)
+gA
⎡
⎣γj(t) +
∑
k
log
⎛
⎝
Mk∑
iϵH(k)
vij(t)ˆπi(t)
⎞
⎠
⎤
⎦ − hj(t)
ˆπj(t) = ehj
∑
jϵH(j) ehj
(2)
τL
d/Lambda1i(t)
dt = ˆπi(t) − /Lambda1i(t)( 3 )
τL
d/Lambda1ij(t)
dt = ˆπi(t)ˆπj(t) − /Lambda1ij(t)( 4 )
βi(t) = log
(
/Lambda1j(t)
)
(5)
wij(t) =
(
1 − λ2
0
)
/Lambda1ij(t) + λ2
0
[(1 − λ0) /Lambda1i(t) + λ0]
[
(1 − λ0) /Lambda1j(t) + λ0
] (6)
τA
dμi(t)
dt = ˆπi(t) − μi(t)( 7 )
τA
dμij(t)
dt = ˆπi(t)ˆπj(t) − μij(t)( 8 )
γi(t) = log
(
μj(t)
)
(9)
vij(t) =
(
1 − λ2
0
)
μij(t) + λ2
0
[(1 − λ0)μi(t) + λ0]
[
(1− λ0) μj(t) + λ0
] (10)
As BCPNNs learn probability estimates of internal and external
events, their activity ﬂow, ˆπj(t), can be interpreted as inference.
BCPNNs exhibit unequal coding strength for learned patterns,
depending on the overlap with other learned patterns and most
importantly, their age. The dynamical, gradual forgetting of the
oldest patterns allows BCPNNs to learn new patterns indeﬁnitely
and escape the problem of CF that haunts other kinds of neu-
ral networks and often necessitates some process of interleaved
unlearning to keep these networks viable for memory modeling
of this kind (Walker and Stickgold, 2004).
An example of the intrinsic replay activity generated by this
kind of network can be seen in Figure 2.
PATTERN REPRESENTATIONS
Having multiple involved brain regions entails multiple mem-
ory traces that may coexist but serve the same episodic memory.
The randomly drawn neocortical input patterns have one active
unit per ten-unit hypercolumn and consequently randomly vary-
ing degrees of overlap, a major cause of the model’s stochastic
behavior.
The three memory systems are inter-connected by feed-
forward and feed-back connections. There are several possible
ways of setting up these connections. Neurobiologically, the inter-
nal representations of the connected structure are expected to
differ. While sensory activations in earlier cortical processing
stages are expected to represent speciﬁc stimulus properties, HIP
and PFC activations likely represent abstracted, sparsiﬁed, and
decorrelated versions of such internal representation.
For reasons of simplicity, we assumed PFC patterns to be a sub-
set of the CTX patterns generated through a 1-to-1 connection
between units that leaves out some CTX units, as PFC has fewer
units (A HIP→ PFC connection can in principle be implemented
to derive some of the PFC activation from HIP activity as well,
but was left out here in favor of a more transparent generation of
training pattern activity). For the HIP representation however, the
forward connection from CTX is implemented as a sparsiﬁcation-
process (kWTA) that reduces the level of activity by half (to 5%)
and achieves strong pattern separation. In the pattern generator,
this is implemented by connecting the CTX activation to HIP
through a connection matrix with random, constant weights and
selecting the 5% most active units (i.e. k = 13) as the derived hip-
pocampal encoding of that pattern. The practical implication of
such an implementation is that if two CTX inputs are becoming
less similar, the HIP representations of these input patterns will
quickly become much more dissimilar, assigning distinct repre-
sentations to each input pattern ( Figure 3), while the respective
CTX (and PFC) representations will on average be similar (as
measured by normalized pattern overlap) to the same degree as
the input. This is justiﬁed qualitatively by experimental observa-
tions of sparse activation and strong pattern separation in Dentate
Gyrus and CA3 ( Leutgeb et al., 2007; Bakker et al., 2008 ), while
the quantitative choice of doubling sparsity is an arbitrary choice
that seems to work well.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org July 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 64 | 6

===== PAGE 7 =====
Fiebig and Lansner Memory consolidation through autonomous reinstatement
FIGURE 2 | Example of learning (15 random patterns, sequentially
trained over 150 ms) and subsequent autonomous replay activity in a
small BCPNN (50 Units in 5 Hypercolumns). Note that some early patterns
are never replayed due to forgetting, while other, stronger patterns reactivate
multiple times. Longer reactivations are often a sign of less correlated
patterns.
As previous memory models emphasizing the importance of
hippocampal pattern separation have noted, this coding scheme
lends HIP quite different operating characteristics than CTX,
namely a positive Y-Intercept in the ROC curve ( Norman,
2010). While others have stressed that these ﬁndings can be
used to explain differences in modes of recognition (recall
vs. familiarity), we have found additional beneﬁts for our
model: increased pattern separation makes HIP not just bet-
ter at discriminating between studied items and related lures
(while sacriﬁcing some capability to compute global match),
but also improves replay performance in our model, because
it reduces ambiguity/overlap and thus allows for strong rein-
statements, which are—after all—key to successful systems
consolidation.
The real process of feed-forward input abstraction, compres-
sion, or decorrelation presumably occurs through bi-directional
connections between the different network modules. Regarding
the back-projections, some consolidation models simply use a
static 1-to-1 connection (Wittenberg et al., 2002) or random sub-
sets of such ( Murre, 1996) to connect these structures. Instead,
we used plastic connections in the back-projections with a fast
learning time constant τ
L = 9 min. This enables our model to
learn associations between arbitrary representations, allowing for
different coding in separate brain areas/stages.
SIMULATION PHASES
Our simulation evolves in three phases ( Figures 4, 5)p l u s
one phase for recall testing afterwards, during which plastic-
ity is turned-off. Apart from initial brief online learning (using
clamped CTX activity) and modulation of network-dynamics
(gains and time constants) imposed at the transition of phases,
no external intervention in the dynamic activity was undertaken.
Most importantly, the learning networks stayed plastic during the
cycles of convergence and gradual depression of projected pat-
terns, as opposed to models that selectively wait for complete
convergence of attractors before executing any learning rules
(Murre, 1996; Wittenberg et al., 2002).
W e ultimately want to show the consolidation performance of
the overall memory system. For that reason, we made the original
online learning episodes, called perception, very brief. Each new
training pattern is shown for only one simulation time step, forc-
ing one-shot learning in PFC, as the other networks learn too
slowly for recall after this short exposure. Consolidation is then
achieved through spontaneous reactivation of learned patterns,
which in turn causes the corresponding patterns to be projected
in the next network and thus potentially learned or strengthened.
As we undertake a full simulation cycle of one day and one
night in just 330 time steps ( Figure 4)o f1 0 m se a c h ,t h em o d e l
plasticity is scaled against reality by a factor of roughly 26.000. The
chief motivation for this is to enable a study of systems of this kind
at all: Without temporal scaling of this sort, simulation of weeks
or months becomes infeasible due to runtime considerations.
At this scaling, the chosen time constants of 3 min (Short-term
memory), 3 h (Intermediate-term memory) and 6 days (Long-
term memory), are mapped onto 8, 400, 18,500 ms respectively,
thus preserving the ratio of timescales mapped out by the choice
of time constants. Note, that this is a scaling of plasticity only
and does not include a scaling of the neural dynamics. The exact
values of parameters/gains, throughout the different simulation
phases can be found in Ta b l e 2.
PERFORMANCE METRIC
Generally speaking, memory performance can be measured in
many ways. Popular dual-process theories of episodic memory
state that retrieval is contingent on two independent processes,
familiarity (providing a sense of recognition) and recollection
(recovering events and their context). In recent discussions of
MTL function this has often been understood to also imply sepa-
rate brain areas for each process. However, computational models
have shown that both kinds of recognition judgments can, in fact,
be simultaneously supported by the same population (Greve et al.,
2010).
T o limit the scope of this paper, we restrict ourselves to the
evaluation of recall performance, which is measured by cueing the
system with a studied pattern and measuring the distance between
the respective activations after convergence. The distance metric
for recall is borrowed from Greve et al. (2010) and described by
Equation (11).
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org July 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 64 | 7

===== PAGE 8 =====
Fiebig and Lansner Memory consolidation through autonomous reinstatement
FIGURE 3 | Activity in HIP changes with the cortical input, as
measured by normalized activity overlap. The hippocampus
implements a pattern separation mechanism which yields highly
signiﬁcant changes in activity when cortical input changes only slightly.
Left: randomly varying the activity of 1–10 of the 50 cortical
hypercolumns yields highly signiﬁcant changes in hippocampal encoding.
Note that to highlight the variability of coding, error bars denote one
STD, not SEM (
∗∗∗We test against H 0: median difference between the
pairs is zero. As normal distributions of overlaps are not guaranteed in
this case, we use the non-parametric pairwise Wilcoxon signed-rank
test, yielding p < 10− 165, when using 1000 pairs.) Right:e f f e c t i v e
pattern separation can also be seen from the fact that hippocampal
patterns diverge much faster than cortical input, e.g., changing the
activity of just one cortical hypercolumn yields a 2% CTX pattern
change (as measured by 98% overlap), but nearly 17% in HIP . When
we change 10 hypercolumns (80% cortical overlap) then about half of
the originally active HIP units are no longer a part of the encoded
pattern. Note again that error bars denote STD, rather than SEM.
FIGURE 4 | The simulation cycle with its three alternating phases,
named perception, reﬂection, and sleep. Online learning occurs only
during perception. All other learning is a function of memory consolidation
during reﬂection and sleep. The gating of various projections at the
transition between simulation phases is summarized also in T able 2.
After a full simulation run, covering several simulated weeks,
recall performance is evaluated for each network separately. These
recall rates are then shown to vary against the time between
training and testing. As recall of HIP and CTX is contingent on
consolidation over time, these plots may also be called consolida-
tion curves. Because patterns are random, and since both replay
behavior and resulting memory consolidation are stochastic, 500
simulation runs were averaged to obtain reliable recall rates.
d
(−→a ,−→b
)
= 1
2
⎛
⎝ 1−
−→a · −→b
⏐⏐−→a
⏐⏐
⏐⏐
⏐−→b
⏐⏐
⏐
⎞
⎠
with−→a = s(t = 0),−→b = lim
t→∞
s(t) (11)
Equation (11) is a recall metric adapted from Greve et al. (2010) .
W e ﬁrst cue the system with a studied pattern a,o b s e r v et h e
resulting activation b (attractor convergence), and measure the
distance d between the respective activations in accordance with
Equation (11). Studied patterns are expected to have a recall dis-
tance near zero, while new patterns will converge to rather distant
attractors. W e compute an optimal decision boundary for recall
judgments (one for each of the three networks) by minimizing
the summed type I and type II errors over all possible decision
boundaries, similar to Greve et al. (2010) . Decision boundary
values for each stage can be found in Ta b l e 1.
Beyond looking at each of the three networks separately, we
could view the model as one integrated memory system and thus
disregard the origin of a recalled pattern in quantifying recall. In
fact, whether a memory is still dependent on hippocampus, or
already fully consolidated into hippocampally independent, neo-
cortical long-term memory, makes no behavioral difference in
recall. W e thus deﬁne an effective combined recall rate, accessing
all three networks during the recall phase.
SIMULATED LESIONING, MODULATION, AND SLEEP DEPRIVATION
T o simulate progressing degrees of hippocampal damage, we dis-
able an increasing ratio of HIP units. Disabling a unit also entails
nullifying every synaptic connection from or to that unit. T o
avoid bias in relation to any training pattern, the disabled units
were randomly selected. T emporal gradients of amnesia were
thereafter measured by comparing the resulting change in recall
rates. Anterograde effects were measured by lesioning the system
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org July 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 64 | 8

===== PAGE 9 =====
Fiebig and Lansner Memory consolidation through autonomous reinstatement
FIGURE 5 | The three simulation phases 1–3 and their active
components, as well as the conﬁguration during cued recall after
many days of consolidation. During perception, feed-forward
projections from neocortical input generate separate PFC and HIP
traces, which are associated to the CTX trace via Hebbian-learning in
the back-projections. This online learning episode is very brief and
effectively too short to establish lasting HIP and CTX memories. During
the reﬂection phase, replay in PFC (similar to active rehearsal)
generated by the interplay of its auto-association and adaptation
projections, drives HIP reinstatements, thus facilitating learning in its
auto-associative projections. During sleep, HIP replay then drives CTX
reinstatements which facilitate long-term learning. During cued recall,
the external neocortical activation generates corresponding cues in PFC
and HIP through feed-forward connections. All three networks are then
individually or simultaneously allowed to relax/converge to attractors,
potentially yielding successful recall of a corresponding training pattern.
∗∗∗It should be noted, that the strongest inﬂuence of the PFC on the
hippocampus in primates is indirect through parahippocampal cortices.
The direct projection PFC-to-HIP is neuroanatomically non-existent
(Otani, 2004 ). We consider this modeling issue in the discussion.
before learning and then comparing the achieved performance
of the damaged system against an unlesioned control simula-
tion. Modulations of plasticity were made via a temporal up or
down-regulation of learning time constants τ
L, and a scenario
of persistent sleep deprivation was implemented by reducing the
length of the sleep phase by 50%.
RESULTS
CONSOLIDATION AND AMNESIA
W e ran the entire system in the described simulation cycle
(Figure 4) for 39 simulated days and attempted to consolidate a
total of 351 memory patterns. The unused patterns of day 40 were
used to validate thresholds of the recall metric by measuring false
positives (see Equation 11).
Before we take a look at consolidation over time, it is worth
taking a glance at the statistics of autonomous reactivation, which
is supposed to drive the consolidation process. W e classify a pat-
tern as reinstated when the projected activity surpasses 90% over-
lap with one particular training pattern. After some time, activity
of such a pattern will depress below this threshold and eventu-
ally new patterns will emerge. W e ﬁnd that reinstatement events
occur with a frequency of 6.56 Hz in HIP during reﬂection and
6.13 Hz in CTX during sleep. It is noteworthy that these events
vary in length ( Figure 6) due to random correlations between
patterns and varying trace strength. While PFC encoding strength
is more uniform, yielding a unimodal distribution of HIP rein-
statement lengths, this does not hold true for CTX reinstatements
during sleep, where we can clearly distinguish between weakly
(i.e., brieﬂy) reactivating patterns and strong reactivations with
much longer durations, which presumably consolidate better.
T urning our eye to learning, forgetting, and consolidation
over time, the top panel of Figure 7 shows that PFC can reliably
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org July 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 64 | 9

===== PAGE 10 =====
Fiebig and Lansner Memory consolidation through autonomous reinstatement
FIGURE 6 | Replay drives reinstatements of earlier patterns in HIP or
CTX, respectively .The length of these reinstatements is distributed
around an average reinstatement length of 40.08 ms for PFC-driven HIP
reinstatements during reﬂection and 95.43 ms for HIP-driven CTX
reinstatements during sleep.
store only the most recent patterns of the last day (343–351),
while HIP can recall much older patterns. Forgetting in CTX
is very slow: some of the retrievable patterns are more than a
month old. However, only about a third of the patterns shown
ever successfully consolidate into retrievable long-term memo-
ries. Our analysis shows that consolidation failure is typically
rooted in insufﬁcient hippocampal replay during sleep, so famil-
iarity (which could be measured using a different metric, not
shown here) is often still established. In conjunction with learn-
ing repetition or plasticity modulation, full consolidation (i.e.,
independent CTX recall) of any speciﬁc pattern can, however,
be virtually guaranteed ( Fiebig, 2012 ), as we also show in the
modulation experiment illustrated in Figure 10. CTX recall of
recent patterns is usually weak, as they were not sufﬁciently con-
solidated during sleep yet. Maximum cortical consolidation is
reached about a week after the initial acquisition.
Combined recall is severely affected when HIP is lesioned,
as can be seen in Figure 7. The corresponding RA gradient in
Figure 8 shows the ratio of lost recall rate vs. control. On the
whole, it shows an inverse temporal gradient. Recall of remove
patterns—that have already consolidated—remains unaffected by
lesions. V ery recent pattern recall is supported by PFC and thus
also unaffected by simulated hippocampal lesions. The antero-
grade gradient shows a persistent, ﬂat deﬁcit (again with the
exception of very recent memories) that quickly increases with
the size of the lesion, highlighting an increasing inability to
form new long-term memories. The onset of amnesia also shifts
to more and more recent patterns with greater lesion size, as
HIP loses more and more capacity. This kind of amnesia is
markedly different from a sleep deprivation experiment shown
in the same plot, where reduced sleep-dependent consolidation
causes a much less severe anterograde deﬁcit. HIP stays fully
functional in this case, so the amnesic effect is seen only much
later, when it starts to forget after about a week. This particular
ﬁnding is inconsistent with biological evidence, which clearly
shows impaired hippocampal memory function on many tasks
following sleep deprivation, rather than just impaired systems
consolidation (Walker and Stickgold, 2006).
FIGURE 7 | Consolidation, as measured by recall rates of training
patterns from each stage (PFC, HIP , CTX).By averaging the recall rates for
patterns introduced on the same day, we obtain a more direct relationship
between the recall rate and the age of a pattern in days. Combined recall
from all stages (solid lines) is shown with and without hippocampus (full
lesion) to illustrate its importance for patterns of different age.
Figure 9 shows a side-by-side comparison of our own simu-
lation results ( Figure 9C) and two data sets from rodent experi-
ments ( Figures 9A,B), showing temporally graded RA gradients
following hippocampal lesioning.
MODULATION EXPERIMENTS
T o test the effect of plasticity modulations on consolidation, we
ran two simulations. One had selectively up-regulated plastic-
ity ( Figure 10) for one of the percepts shown over the course of
a stimulation and the other had a transient down-regulation of
plasticity (Figure 11).
Sudden up-regulation of HIP plasticity by a factor of two dur-
ing learning of one speciﬁc percept (modeling something like
an emotional relevance signal or attention), can double CTX
recall probability in out model, indicating successful consolida-
tion ( Figure 10). The middle panel shows that increased recall
of this percept comes at the cost of reduced consolidation odds
mostly for patterns learned before, but also after. The nega-
tive retrograde impact (percept no. <89) is mostly due to HIP
overwriting; weakening some patterns to the point that they no
longer reactivate/consolidate. However, there is also an additional
anterograde effect, which due to the week-long consolidation
time window affects a few patterns still in consolidation dur-
ing the time of modulation ( ∼ 76–89) as well as many patterns
learned after. The lower panel illustrates the extended HIP life-
time of the boosted percept 89, which means that the negative
anterograde effect on new patterns stretches out for some time
after the modulation occurs (i.e., percepts 90–100 show dimin-
ished consolidation vs. control). Note that this occurs because
patterns of the modulated percept outcompete other patterns for
reactivation during sleep for some time, until HIP strength of per-
cept 89 was diluted to the point that its patterns do not activate
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org July 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 64 | 10

===== PAGE 11 =====
Fiebig and Lansner Memory consolidation through autonomous reinstatement
FIGURE 8 | Five different amnesia gradients. Retrograde amnesia after full hippocampal lesioning, anterograde amnesia (performance measured after using
the lesioned system for 39 days) with different lesion size and persistent sleep deprivation, where we cut the length of the sleeping phase by half.
preferentially anymore. V ery remote percepts are less affected, as
their consolidation window has already closed because of hip-
pocampal forgetting. Finally, the bottom panel shows how this
modulation not only increases the percepts HIP life-time by 1
or 2 days, but stronger encoding results in both faster and more
successful neocortical consolidation. More frequent reactivations
during sleep cause maximum neocortical consolidation of the
modulated percept after just 3 nights.
The temporal down-regulation of HIP plasticity ( Figure 11)
yielded a much more peculiar memory effect, namely narrowly
focused AA in conjunction with retrograde facilitation. Due to
the timing of the modulation onset, the most affected patterns
belong to a single percept, which was introduced right at the onset
of said modulation. Later precepts were barely affected, due to the
fast decay of the modulation. The top panel of Figure 11 shows
CTX and HIP recall probability of the most affected percept near
zero, indicating that the modulation effectively disrupted hip-
pocampal encoding and subsequently diminished consolidation.
The middle panel reveals that in addition to this AA effect, per-
cepts/patterns learned up to 6 days before the modulation exhibit
improved consolidation (5 days after the modulation event, all
but one of the 20 percepts learned before the event show a positive
change in performance vs. control) This retrograde facilitation
effect underscores the competitive nature of consolidation dur-
ing sleep: Because patterns of the blocked percept are encoded
so weakly, other, older patterns can reactivate instead during
the sleep phases following the modulation, thus improving their
consolidation odds. Finally the bottom panel shows how this
modulation not only decreases the HIP lifetime of the affected
percept to a mere 2 days, but also how weaker encoding results in
slower and much reduced neocortical consolidation.
DISCUSSION
ADDRESSING THE FOUR CHALLENGES
W e tasked ourselves with four goals: T o implement autonomous
replay, address the temporal scope of systems consolidation,
include working memory in that scope, and defeat the common
problem of CF . T o these ends, we have built an extended three-
stage implementation of the CLS framework using a consolida-
tion chain of Bayesian Conﬁdence Propagation Neural Networks,
capable of autonomous replay. Where other models resort to
forced activations and top-down control to generate reinstate-
ment dynamics, we have shown that on-going internal activity
(autonomous replay) is sufﬁcient for consolidation along a chain
of networks with differing memory traces, sparsity, network
structure, network size, and most importantly extreme differences
in plasticity time-constants, spanning several orders of magni-
tude. The model thus constitutes an interactive network of diverse
recurrent neural networks. (e.g., CTX feeds into HIP , building
a sparse hippocampal trace, which in turn facilitates cortical
consolidation via back-projections during sleep reactivations).
Our model implements a functional consolidation process
from one-shot learning capability to stable neocortical mem-
ory engrams due to its three-stage architecture and wide span
of time constants. The model parameterizes the mechanism
behind different cortical memory systems, from short-term work-
ing memory to long-term memory in terms of different set
points for plasticity of synaptic weights and intrinsic excitabil-
ity. Furthermore, the model can keep learning indeﬁnitely and
functionally solves the problem of CF by selective, competitive
consolidation with simultaneous learning and forgetting on all
timescales, a process which also explains why only a fraction of
all percepts become long-term memories.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org July 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 64 | 11

===== PAGE 12 =====
Fiebig and Lansner Memory consolidation through autonomous reinstatement
FIGURE 9 | (A,B) Behavioral responses of animals receiving extensive
hippocampal system lesions (circles) or control lesions (squares) as a function
of the numbers of days elapsing between exposure to the relevant
experiences and the occurrence of the lesion. Bars surrounding each data
point indicate the standard error. Panel (A) shows the percentage choice of a
speciﬁc sample food (out of two alternatives) by rats exposed to a
conspeciﬁc that had eaten the sample food. Panel (B) shows fear (freezing)
behavior shown by rats when returned to an environment in which they had
experienced paired presentations of tones and footshock. Data in Panel (A)
are from Winocur (1990). Data in Panel (B) are from Kim and Fanselow
(1992). The added lines are from a simple differential equations ﬁt from a
previous modeling attempt ( McClelland et al., 1995 ). Panel (C): Combined
retrieval rates of the normal and hippocampally lesioned simulation model.
Rather than the standard error (which is too small to show, as we average
500 simulations), error bars indicate a standard deviation of the underlying
data, showing the stochasticity of the consolidation process.
BIOLOGICAL PARALLELS, DIFFERENCES, AND IMPLICATIONS
Beyond memory functionality, much of the modeled connectiv-
ity can be asserted on biological grounds, yet it can be argued,
that this does not hold for the PFC-to-HIP pathway critically
used in the reﬂection phase of the simulation. As we pointed
out earlier, there is no known direct pathway of this kind. The
strongest inﬂuence of the PFC on the hippocampus in primates is
indirect through parahippocampal cortices ( Otani, 2004 ), most
notably the entorhinal cortex, which feeds into the hippocam-
pus and dentate gyrus (which in turn also feeds into the central
hippocampal ﬁelds). W e have implemented this second path-
way in our model in a way that simulates the sparsiﬁcation and
pattern separation observed in experimental data of the dentate
gyrus ( Leutgeb et al., 2007; Bakker et al., 2008 ). It is conceiv-
able that the direct PFC-to-HIP connection in our model can
be functionally replaced by an indirect pathway through CTX
instead. However, the biggest implementation hurdle with respect
to this is the achieved sparsiﬁcation itself, as non-consolidated
CTX patterns driven via the PFC will be noisy. This noise becomes
most problematically ampliﬁed due to pattern separation in the
forward connection to HIP , which is otherwise most beneﬁcial in
improving HIP capacity and reactivation dynamics during sleep.
As this example shows, models of this kind can help us identify
architectural problems in neural systems analysis.
Correctly scaled, the model predicts that many hundreds or
thousands of reactivations are necessary for guaranteed consol-
idation. This might seem like a huge number but is, in fact,
congruent with biological data: rodent studies have shown aver-
age SPW/R event frequencies between 0.3 and 1.2 Hz during
SWS, which are signiﬁcantly increased in number and ampli-
tude after learning and recall ( Eschenko et al., 2008 ). Even a
single hour SWS yields more than 10
3 SPW/R events associ-
ated with hippocampal reactivations. A week-long consolidation
period thus contains on the order of 10
5 replay events or more, to
be distributed over the select set of consolidating patterns.
Spontaneously occurring HIP reactivations in our model are
signiﬁed by sharp population activity bursts, occur with a fre-
quency of roughly 6 Hz and last for 30–170 ms, which is similar to
biophysically observed sharp-waves that have been closely linked
to hippocampal reactivations (see Introduction). The fact that
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org July 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 64 | 12

===== PAGE 13 =====
Fiebig and Lansner Memory consolidation through autonomous reinstatement
FIGURE 10 | In this experiment, we boosted hippocampal plasticity
during learning of percept 89 (consisting of patterns 265–267) by a factor
of two (halﬁng τL ) and tested recall 5 days later . T op:consolidation curves
showing the probability of successful recall 5 days after introduction of
percept 89. Middle: the absolute change of recall probability vs. controls
(simulation without any modulation). Bottom: the time course of
consolidation for the modulated percept, as measured by testing HIP and
CTX recall every day following the original learning experience.
this is achieved with biophysically constrained parameter values,
i.e., the adaptation time constant τA, adds to the list of interesting
biological analogies.
Obviously the real process behind acquisition and consoli-
dation of episodic memory is much more complex than our
model suggests, yet despite many simpliﬁcations, the results show
a range of experimentally observed properties and characteris-
tics. These include competitive consolidation, effects of primacy
and recency in short-term consolidation (not speciﬁcally dis-
cussed here, see Lansner et al., 2013 ), retrograde facilitation after
impaired acquisition, as well as typical amnesia effects following
simulated hippocampal lesions.
With respect to the latter, we conclude that the model exhibits
temporally graded RA similar to pathologies seen in human case
studies, such as Patient HM ( Scoville and Milner, 2000 ): intact
working memory, temporally graded RA, preserving remote cor-
tical memories, as well as severe, ﬂat AA. Given that these obser-
vations were a major reason for the development of consolidation
theory and hippocampal memory research in the ﬁrst place; our
computational model is a rather successful implementation of
these concepts. The similarity between our RA curves in Figure 9,
bottom panel and those in the top panels, showing experimental
RA is striking, conﬁrming predictions about the shape of the
amnesia gradient (Nadel and Moscovitch, 1997).
However, our model also exhibits one peculiar difference
to the above named experimental studies. It predicts strong
recall of very recent patterns, as they are supported by
hippocampally-independent working memory. It is necessary to
differentiate this prediction of a retrograde gradient from the
shown anterograde preservation of working memory capacity fol-
lowing MTL damage encompassing the hippocampus ( Jeneson
et al., 2010; Jeneson and Squire, 2012 ). T o the authors knowl-
edge, a retrograde preservation of active working memory traces
has not been shown before and constitutes a testable prediction,
given neurophysiological deactivation of hippocampal function
on the timescale of working memory, such as focal cooling may
allow ( T anaka et al., 2008 ). Experimental lesion studies ( Squire
and Cohen, 1979; Winocur, 1990; Zola-Morgan and Squire, 1990;
Kim and Fanselow, 1992 ) simply cannot account for the ﬂeeting
storage of new percepts in short-term memory. For example, test
animals (rats, monkeys) are lesioned under deep anesthesia and
require several days rest after the lesioning operation. T raining,
lesioning and directly testing an animal within seconds (the
timespan of working memory) is practically impossible. Rather,
tests are run on a daily or weekly basis, which thus necessarily
excludes short-term memory.
ON COMPETITIVE CONSOLIDATION AND MEMORY MODULATION
The nature of consolidation learning in our model is competi-
tive (only one pattern can be reinstated at a time), so it is highly
susceptible to memory modulation or learning repetition. Our
model predicts that relevant hippocampal memories (meaning
more strongly encoded) consolidate faster and more reliably than
other memories: when HIP plasticity is modulated by some kind
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org July 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 64 | 13

===== PAGE 14 =====
Fiebig and Lansner Memory consolidation through autonomous reinstatement
FIGURE 1 1 | In this experiment, we simulated the memory impact of
triazolam with a half-life of 2 h by reducing hippocampal plasticity
by a factor of 10 and decaying this modulation with a 2 h half-life
to the original level of plasticity . The modulation was triggered at the
introduction of percept 89. To p: consolidation curves measured 5 days
after the modulation event, showing the lasting effect on the probability
of successful recall. Middle: the absolute change of recall probability
vs. controls. Note that the y-axis was broken to also visualize the
smaller impact seen in the other, unmodulated percepts. Bottom:t h e
time course of consolidation for the modulated percept, obtained by
testing recall from HIP and CTX every day following the original
learning experience.
of relevance signal, the resulting change in memory trace strength
directly affects the probability of successful long-term consoli-
dation into cortex, as strongly encoded patterns reactivate both
longer and more often than other patterns during autonomous
replay (Sandberg, 2003; Fiebig, 2012).
Our series of modulation experiments, where we temporar-
ily up- or down-regulated the degree of plasticity in HIP , can
be interpreted as simulations of the consolidation impact of
dopaminergic relevance signals (say from the amygdala), atten-
tion, or the effect of other plasticity modulating agents like
benzodiazepines or ethanol. For an example, studies show that
both ethanol ( Lister et al., 1987; Givens, 1995, 1996 ) and benzo-
diazepines like T riazolam (Hinrichs et al., 1984; File et al., 1999;
Fillmore et al., 2001 ) induce a remarkable combination of AA
and retrograde facilitation. The hypothesized mechanism for this
is impaired acquisition through a suppression of L TP induction
in brain areas required for the initial learning, i.e., PFC and HIP
(Blitzer et al., 1990 ). Reduced new learning presumably beneﬁts
consolidation of older memories, as the expression of L TP and
ongoing consolidation mechanism itself is left intact.
T riazolam has a half-life of about 2 h, and our modeling of
a similar, temporally decaying plasticity disruption ( Figure 11)
yields the same peculiar combination of AA and retrograde facil-
itation. W e consider the successful replication of this effect in a
working model based on artiﬁcial neural networks a step forward
in the modeling of memory consolidation, improving our conﬁ-
dence in working implementations of CLS.
CONCLUSION
Contradictory biological evidence regarding disassociations in
RA between different aspects of declarative memory ( Nadel and
Moscovitch, 1997) and evidence of very extensive and sometimes
ﬂat RA gradients ( T ravis et al., 2010 ) clearly point out weak-
nesses in the current consolidation model. Similarly, the CLS
concept of low cortical involvement during initial acquisition
has recently been called into question by experimental stud-
ies ( T se et al., 2011 ). These and other observations underscore.
The necessity for testing variations of the model are underscored
by these and other observations, including reconsolidation pro-
cesses ( Wittenberg et al., 2002; Alberini, 2005 ), schema theory
(T se et al., 2007), multiple trace theory ( Nadel and Moscovitch,
1997) or a kind of trace-link system ( Murre, 1996 ), some of
which have already been shown to deal with certain known
inconsistencies of the standard model. Since the conception of
CLS, many further details, especially regarding functional dis-
associations ( Eichenbaum et al., 2011 ) of different parts of the
MTL have been explored and deserve further consideration in
computational accounts of consolidation.
Irrespective of this, the success of CLS in explaining temporally
graded RA, AA, wake and sleep replay and the overall dynamics
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org July 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 64 | 14

===== PAGE 15 =====
Fiebig and Lansner Memory consolidation through autonomous reinstatement
of memory consolidation even in conjunction with plasticity
modulations, underscore its continued scientiﬁc value.
A similar network model to the one presented here, but with
spiking model neurons is currently under development and with
the right tuning and setup, our model can be applied to multiple
trace theory or other consolidation mechanisms, such as synap-
tic reentry reinforcement ( Wittenberg et al., 2002 )a n dm o d e l
REM sleep. For example, we can enable hippocampal reconsoli-
dation by letting HIP stay plastic during replay, such that we not
only consolidate neocortical traces during SWS, but replayed hip-
pocampal attractors also reinforce, degrade, or otherwise change
themselves with each reinstatement event (Lundqvist et al., 2011).
Cascade models of synaptic plasticity ( Fusi et al., 2005 )a sw e l l
as further partitioning of the memory system ( Roxin and Fusi,
2013) can presumably extend the temporal reach of this model
even further.
Our results should be seen as mainly qualitative. McClelland
pointed out that the huge range of differences in the timescale of
the consolidation phenomenon across species, age and other fac-
tors is mostly a function of different learning rates ( McClelland
et al., 1995 ). The values of almost all our parameters—
including the scaled learning rates—can be questioned on bio-
logical grounds. However, our model features a broad array
of neurobiological details and clearly shows the viability of a
three-stage consolidation chain, driven by autonomous replay
that turned attractors into more useful quasi-stable attractors
and thus expands the architectural options available to memory
researchers looking for appropriate neural network models today.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
W e thank Karl-Magnus Petersson (Max Planck Institute for
Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen) and Mark V an Rossum (Institute
for Adaptive and Neural Comunication, Edinburgh) for valu-
able comments on the draft manuscript and Simon Benjaminsson
and Mikael Lundqvist for their support during a master thesis
project that preceded this work. W e further acknowledge Anders
Sandberg, whose work laid the theoretical groundwork for the
application of Bayesian Conﬁdence Propagation Neural Networks
in memory models.
The current project was ﬁnancially supported jointly by
grants from the Swedish Science Council (V etenskapsrådet,
VR- 621-2012-3502), VINNOV A (Swedish Governmental Agency
for Innovation Systems), the Swedish Foundation for Strategic
Research (through the Stockholm Brain Institute), and from the
European Union (BrainScaleS project; FP7 FET Integrated Project
269921).
REFERENCES
Adelman, J. P ., Maylie, J., and Sah, P . (2012). Small-conductance Ca2+-activated
K+ channels: form and function. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 74, 245–269. doi:
10.1146/annurev-physiol-020911-153336
Alberini, C. M. (2005). Mechanisms of memory stabilization: are consolidation and
reconsolidation similar or distinct processes? Trends Neurosc i. 28, 51–56. doi:
10.1016/j.tins.2004.11.001
Alvarez, P ., and Squire, L. R. (1994). Memory consolidation and the medial tem-
poral lobe: a simple network model. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 91, 7041–7045.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.91.15.7041
Bakker, A., Kirwan, C. B., Miller, M., and Stark, C. E. L. (2008). Pattern separation
in the human hippocampal CA3 and dentate gyrus. Science 319, 1640–1642. doi:
10.1126/science.1152882
Bibbig, A. (1996). “Hippocampal two-stage learning and memory consolida-
tion, ” in European Meetings on Cybernetics and Systems Research (EMCSR)
(Vienna).
Blitzer, R. D., Gil, O., and Landau, E. M. (1990). Long-term potentiation in rat
hippocampus is inhibited by low concentrations of ethanol. Brain Res. 537,
203–208. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(90)90359-J
Buxhoeveden, D. P ., and Casanova, M. F . (2002). The minicolumn hypothesis in
neuroscience. Brain 125, 935–951. doi: 10.1093/brain/awf110
Buzsáki, G. (1986). Hippocampal sharp waves: their origin and signiﬁcance. Brain
Res. 398, 242–252. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(86)91483-6
Buzsáki, G. (1998). Memory consolidation during sleep: a neurophysiological
perspective. J. Sleep Res. 7, 17–23. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2869.7.s1.3.x
Buzsáki, G, Horváth, Z., Urioste, R., Hetke, J., and Wise, K. (1992). High-
frequency network oscillation in the hippocampus.Science (New Y ork, N.Y.)256,
1025–1027. doi: 10.1126/science.1589772
Buzsáki, G., Leung, L.-W. S., and V anderwolf, C. H. (1983). Cellular bases
of hippocampal EEG in the behaving rat. Brain Res. Rev. 6, 139–171. doi:
10.1016/0165-0173(83)90037-1
Dupret, D., O’Neill, J., Pleydell-Bouverie, B., and Csicsvari, J. (2010). The
reorganization and reactivation of hippocampal maps predict spa-
tial memory performance. Nat. Neurosci. 13, 995–1002. doi: 10.1038/
nn.2599
Ego-Stengel, V ., and Wilson, M. A. (2010). Disruption of ripple-associated hip-
pocampal activity during rest impairs spatial learning in the rat. Hippocampus
20, 1–10. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20707
Eichenbaum, H., Sauvage, M., Fortin, N., Komorowski, R., and Lipton,
P . (2011). T owards a functional organization of episodic memory in
the medial temporal lobe. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 36, 1597–1608. doi:
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2011.07.006
Eschenko, O., Ramadan, W., Mölle, M., Born, J., and Sara, S. J. (2008). Sustained
increase in hippocampal sharp-wave ripple activity during slow-wave sleep
after learning. Learn. Mem. (Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.) 15, 222–228. doi:
10.1101/lm.726008
Euston, D. R., T atsuno, M., and McNaughton, B. L. (2007). Fast-forward play-
back of recent memory sequences in prefrontal cortex during sleep. Science
(New Y ork, N.Y.)318, 1147–1150. doi: 10.1126/science.1148979
Favorov, O. V ., and Diamond, M. E. (1990). Demonstration of discrete place-
deﬁned columns–segregates–in the cat SI. J. Comp. Neurol. 298, 97–112. doi:
10.1002/cne.902980108
Fiebig, F . (2012). Memory Consolidation through Reinstatement in a Connectionist
Model of Hippocampus and Neocortex. Stockholm: Royal Institute of T echnology.
Available online at: http://www.nada.kth.se/utbildning/grukth/exjobb/rap
portlistor/2012/rapporter12/ﬁebig_ﬂorian_12071.pdf
File, S. E., Fluck, E., and Joyce, E. M. (1999). Conditions under which
lorazepam can facilitate retrieval. J. Clin. Psychopharmacol . 19, 349–353. doi:
10.1097/00004714-199908000-00011
Fillmore, M. T., Kelly, T. H., Rush, C. R., and Hays, L. (2001). Retrograde facilitation
of memory by triazolam: effects on automatic processes. Psychopharmacology
158, 314–321. doi: 10.1007/s002130100873
Fransén, E., and Lansner, A. (1995). Low spiking rates in a population of mutu-
ally exciting pyramidal cells. Netw. Comput. Neural Syst . 6, 271–288. doi:
10.1088/0954-898X/6/2/008
Fransén, E., T ahvildari, B., Egorov, A. V ., Hasselmo, M. E., and Alonso, A.
A. (2006). Mechanism of graded persistent cellular activity of entorhinal
cortex layer v neurons. Neuron 49, 735–746. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2006.
01.036
Fusi, S., Drew, P . J., and Abbott, L. F . (2005). Cascade models of synaptically stored
memories. Neuron 45, 599–611. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.02.001
Fuster, J. M. (2008). The Prefrontal Cortex . Creativity, V ol. 1. doi: 10.1016/S0896-
6273(00)80673-X. Available online at: http://books .google.com/books?
id=zuZlvNICdhUC&pgis=1
Girardeau, G., Benchenane, K., Wiener, S. I., Buzsáki, G., Zugaro, M. B., and
Buzsaki, G. (2009). Selective suppression of hippocampal ripples impairs spatial
memory. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 1222–1223. doi: 10.1038/nn.2384
Givens, B. (1995). Low doses of ethanol impair spatial working memory and
reduce hippocampal theta activity. Alcohol. Clin. Exp. Res. 19, 763–767. doi:
10.1111/j.1530-0277.1995.tb01580.x
Givens, B. (1996). Behavioral correlates of single units in the medial septal area:
the effect of ethanol. Neuroscience 71, 417–427. doi: 10.1016/0306-4522(95)
00443-2
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org July 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 64 | 15

===== PAGE 16 =====
Fiebig and Lansner Memory consolidation through autonomous reinstatement
Graham, K. S., Barense, M. D., and Lee, A. C. H. (2010). Going beyond L TM in the
MTL: a synthesis of neuropsychological and neuroimaging ﬁndings on the role
of the medial temporal lobe in memory and perception. Neuropsychologia 48,
831–853. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2010.01.001
Greve, A., Donaldson, D. I., and van Rossum, M. C. W. (2010). A single-trace
dual-process model of episodic memory: a novel computational account of
familiarity and recollection. Hippocampus 20, 235–251. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20606
Hasselmo, M. E., and McClelland, J. L. (1999). Neural models of memory. Curr.
Opin. Neurobiol. 9, 184–188. doi: 10.1016/S0959-4388(99)80025-7
Hinrichs, J. V ., Ghoneim, M. M., and Mewaldt, S. P . (1984). Diazepam
and memory: retrograde facilitation produced by interference reduction.
Psychopharmacology 84, 158–162. doi: 10.1007/BF00427439
Jacobsen, C. F . (1936). Functions of frontal association area in primates. Comp.
Psychol. Monogr. 13, 1–60. doi: 10.1001/archneurpsyc.1935.02250150108009
Jeneson, A., Mauldin, K. N., and Squire, L. R. (2010). Intact working memory
for relational information after medial temporal lobe damage. J. Neurosci. 30,
13624–13629. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2895-10.2010
Jeneson, A., and Squire, L. R. (2012). W orking memory, long-term memory, and
medial temporal lobe function. Learn. Mem. (Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.) 19,
15–25. doi: 10.1101/lm.024018.111
Johansson, C., and Lansner, A. (2007a). Imposing biological constraints onto an
abstract neocortical attractor network model. Neural Comput. 19, 1871–1896.
doi: 10.1162/neco.2007.19.7.1871
Johansson, C., and Lansner, A. (2007b). T owards cortex sized artiﬁcial neural
systems. Neural Netw. 20, 48–61. doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2006.05.029
Kanter, I. (1988). Potts-glass models of neural networks. Phys. Rev. A. 37:2739. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevA.37.2739
Kim, J. J., and Fanselow, M. S. (1992). Modality-speciﬁc retrograde amnesia of fear.
Science (New Y ork, N.Y.)256, 675–677. doi: 10.1126/science.1585183
Lansner, A. (2009). Associative memory models: from the cell-assembly theory
to biophysically detailed cortex simulations. Trends Neurosc i. 32, 178–186. doi:
10.1016/j.tins.2008.12.002
Lansner, A., Marklund, P ., Sikström, S., and Nilsson, L.-G. (2013). Reactivation in
working memory: an attractor network model of free recall. Edited by Daniel
Durstewitz. PLoS ONE 8:e73776. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073776
Lanting, C. P ., Briley, P . M., Sumner, C. J., and Krumbholz, K. (2013). Mechanisms
of adaptation in human auditory cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 110, 973–983. doi:
10.1152/jn.00547.2012
Lee, A. K., and Wilson, M. A. (2002). Memory of sequential experience in the hip-
pocampus during slow wave sleep. Neuron 36, 1183–1194. doi: 10.1016/S0896-
6273(02)01096-6
Lee, S.-J. R., Escobedo-Lozoya, Y ., Szatmari, E. M., and Y asuda, R. (2009).
Activation of CaMKII in single dendritic spines during long-term potentiation.
Nature 458, 299–304. doi: 10.1038/nature07842
Leutgeb, J. K., Leutgeb, S., Moser, M.-B., and Moser, E. I. (2007). Pattern separation
in the dentate gyrus and CA3 of the hippocampus. Science (New Y ork, N.Y.)315,
961–966. doi: 10.1126/science.1135801
Lister, R. G., Eckardt, M. J., and W eingartner, H. (1987). Ethanol intoxication
and memory. Recent developments and new directions. Recent Dev. Alcohol. 5,
111–126.
Louie, K., and Wilson, M. A. (2001). T emporally structured replay of awake hip-
pocampal ensemble activity during rapid eye movement sleep. Neuron 29,
145–156. doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(01)00186-6
Lundqvist, M., Compte, A., and Lansner, A. (2010). Bistable, irregular ﬁring and
population oscillations in a modular attractor memory network. PloS Comput.
Biol. 6, 1–12. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000803
Lundqvist, M., Herman, P ., and Lansner, A. (2011). Theta and gamma
power increases and alpha/beta power decreases with memory load in an
attractor network model. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 23, 3008–3020. doi: 10.1162/
jocn_a_00029
Lundqvist, M., Rehn, M., and Lansner, A. (2006). Attractor dynamics in a modu-
l a rn e t w o r km o d e lo ft h ec e r e b r a lc o r t e x .Neurocomputing 69, 1155–1159. doi:
10.1016/j.neucom.2005.12.065
Markram, H., Lübke, J., Frotscher, M., and Sakmann, B. (1997). Regulation
of synaptic efﬁcacy by coincidence of postsynaptic Aps and EPSPs. Science
(New Y ork, N.Y.)275, 213–215. doi: 10.1126/science.275.5297.213
Marr, D. (1970). A theory for cerebral neocortex. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 176,
161–234. doi: 10.1098/rspb.1970.0040
Marr, D. (1971). Simple memory: a theory for archicortex. Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
Lond. B Biol. Sci. 262, 23–81. doi: 10.1098/rstb.1971.0078
McClelland, J. L. (1998). “Role of the hippocampus in learning and memory: a
computational analysis, ” in Brain and Values: is a Biological Science of Values
Possible, ed K. H. Pribram (Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum), 535–547.
McClelland, J. L., McNaughton, B. L., and O’Reilly, R. C. (1995). Why there are
complementary learning systems in the hippocampus and neocortex: insights
from the successes and failures of connectionist models of learning and memory.
Psychol. Rev. 102, 419–457. doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.102.3.419
McNaughton, B. L., and Morris, R. G. M. (1987). Hippocampal synaptic enhance-
ment and information storage within a distributed memory system. Trends
Neurosci. 10, 408–415. doi: 10.1016/0166-2236(87)90011-7
Milner, B. (1972). Disorders of learning and memory after temporal lobe lesions in
man. Clin. Neurosurg. 19, 421–446.
Mongillo, G., Barak, O., and T sodyks, M. (2008). Synaptic theory of working mem-
ory. Science (New Y ork, N.Y.)319, 1543–1546. doi: 10.1126/science.1150769
Murre, J. M. (1996). T raceLink: a model of amnesia and consolidation of memory.
Hippocampus 6, 675–684. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1098-1063(1996)6:6&lt;675::AID-
HIPO10&gt;3.0.CO;2-Y
Nadel, L., and Moscovitch, M. (1997). Memory consolidation, retrograde amne-
sia and the hippocampal complex. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol . 7, 217–227. doi:
10.1016/S0959-4388(97)80010-4
Norman, K. A. (2010). How hippocampus and cortex contribute to recognition
memory: revisiting the complementary learning systems model. Hippocampus
20, 1217–1227. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20855
Norman, K. A., Newman, E. L., and Perotte, A. J. (2005). Methods for reducing
interference in the complementary learning systems model: oscillating inhi-
bition and autonomous memory rehearsal. Neural Netw. 18, 1212–1228. doi:
10.1016/j.neunet.2005.08.010
Norman, K. A., and O’Reilly, R. C. (2003). Modeling hippocampal and neo-
cortical contributions to recognition memory: a complementary-learning-
systems approach. Psychol. Rev. 110, 611–646. doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.
110.4.611
Olson, I. R., Page, K., Moore, K. S., Chatterjee, A., and V erfaellie, M. (2006).
W orking memory for conjunctions relies on the medial temporal lobe.
J. Neurosci. 26, 4596–4601. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1923-05.2006
Otani, S. (2004). Prefrontal Cortex: from Synaptic Plasticity to Cognition .S p r i n g e r .
Available online at: http://books .google.com/books?id=nFC9V5CeGFwC&
pgis=1
Peyrache, A., Khamassi, M., Benchenane, K., Wiener, S. I., and Battaglia, F . P .
(2009). Replay of rule-learning related neural patterns in the prefrontal cortex
during sleep. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 919–926. doi: 10.1038/nn.2337
Qin, Y . L., McNaughton, B. L., Skaggs, W. E., and Barnes, C. A. (1997).
Memory reprocessing in corticocortical and hippocampocortical neuronal
ensembles. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 352, 1525–1533. doi:
10.1098/rstb.1997.0139
Roxin, A., and Fusi, S. (2013). Efﬁcient partitioning of memory systems and its
importance for memory consolidation. PLoS Comput. Biol. 9:e1003146. doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003146
Sandberg, A. (2003). Bayesian Attractor Neural Network – Models of Memory .
Department of Numerical Analysis and Computer Science, Stockholm
University.
Sandberg, A., and Lansner, A. (2002). Synaptic depression as an intrinsic driver
of reinstatement dynamics in an attractor network.
Neurocomputing 44–46,
615–622. doi: 10.1016/S0925-2312(02)00448-4
Sandberg, A., Lansner, A., Petersson, K. M., and Ekeberg, O. (2002). A bayesian
attractor network with incremental learning. Network 13, 179–194. doi:
10.1088/0954-898X/13/2/302
Sandberg, A., T egnér, J., and Lansner, A. (2003). A working memory model
based on fast Hebbian learning. Netw. Comput. Neural Syst . 14, 789–802. doi:
10.1088/0954-898X/14/4/309
Scoville, W. B., and Milner, B. (2000). Loss of recent memory after bilateral hip-
pocampal lesions. 1957. J. Neuropsychiatry Clin. Neurosci . 12, 103–113. doi:
10.1136/jnnp.20.1.11
Shen, B., and McNaughton, B. L. (1996). Modeling the spontaneous reac-
tivation of experience-speciﬁc hippocampal cell assembles during sleep.
Hippocampus 6, 685–692. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1098-1063(1996)6:6&lt;685::AID-
HIPO11&gt;3.0.CO;2-X
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org July 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 64 | 16

===== PAGE 17 =====
Fiebig and Lansner Memory consolidation through autonomous reinstatement
Squire, L. R. (1992). Memory and the hippocampus: a synthesis from ﬁndings
with rats, monkeys, and humans. Psychol. Rev. 99, 195–231. doi: 10.1037/0033-
295X.99.3.582
Squire, L. R., and Cohen, N. (1979). Memory and amnesia: resistance to disrup-
tion develops for years after learning. Behav. Neural Biol. 25, 115–125. doi:
10.1016/S0163-1047(79)90841-0
Squire, L. R., and Zola-Morgan, S. (1985). The neuropsychology of memory: new
links between humans and experimental animals. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 444,
137–149. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1985.tb37585.x
Squire, L. R., and Zola-Morgan, S. (1991). The medial temporal lobe memory
system. Science 253, 1380–1386. doi: 10.1126/science.1896849
Sullivan, D., Csicsvari, J., Mizuseki, K., Montgomery, S., Diba, K., and
Buzsáki, G. (2011). Relationships between hippocampal sharp waves, rip-
ples, and fast gamma oscillation: inﬂuence of dentate and entorhinal cor-
tical activity. J. Neurosci. 31, 8605–8616. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0294-
11.2011
T anaka, N., Fujii, M., Imoto, H., Uchiyama, J., Nakano, K., Nomura, S., et al.
(2008). Effective suppression of hippocampal seizures in rats by direct hip-
pocampal cooling with a Peltier chip. J. Neurosurg. 108, 791–797. doi:
10.3171/JNS/2008/108/4/0791
T ravis, S. G., Sparks, F . T., Arnold, T., Lehmann, H., Sutherland, R. J., and
Whishaw, I. Q. (2010). Hippocampal damage produces retrograde but not
anterograde amnesia for a cued location in a spontaneous exploratory task in
rats. Hippocampus 20, 1095–1104. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20710
T reves, A., and Rolls, E. T. (1994). Computational analysis of the role of
the hippocampus in memory. Hippocampus 4, 374–391. doi: 10.1002/hipo.
450040319
T se, D., Langston, R. F ., Kakeyama, M., Bethus, I., Spooner, P . A., W ood, E. R.,
et al. (2007). Schemas and memory consolidation. Science (New Y ork, N.Y.)316,
76–82. doi: 10.1126/science.1135935
T se, D., T akeuchi, T., Kakeyama, M., Kajii, Y ., Okuno, H., T ohyama, C., et al. (2011).
Schema-dependent gene activation and memory encoding in neocortex. Science
(New Y ork, N.Y.)333, 891–895. doi: 10.1126/science.1205274
Walker, M. P ., and Stickgold, R. (2004). Sleep dependent learning and memory
consolidation. Neuron 44, 121–133. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2004.08.031
Walker, M. P ., and Stickgold, R. (2006). Sleep, memory, and plasticity. Annu. Rev.
Psychol. 57, 139–166. doi: 10.1146/annurev.psych.56.091103.070307
Walker, R., and Russo, V . (2004). Memory consolidation and forgetting dur-
ing sleep: a neural network model. Neural Process. Lett. 19, 147–156. doi:
10.1023/B:NEPL.0000023445.96334.eb
Wilson, M. A., and McNaughton, B. L. (1994). Reactivation of hippocampal
ensemble memories during sleep. Science 265, 676–679.
Winocur, G. (1990). Anterograde and retrograde amnesia in rats with dorsal hip-
pocampal or dorsomedial thalamic lesions. Behav. Brain Res. 38, 145–154. doi:
10.1016/0166-4328(90)90012-4
Wittenberg, G. M., Sullivan, M. R., and T sien, J. Z. (2002). Synaptic reentry
reinforcement based network model for long-term memory consolidation.
Hippocampus 12, 637–647. doi: 10.1002/hipo.10102
Zola-Morgan, S., and Squire, L. R. (1985). Medial temporal lesions in mon-
keys impair memory on a variety of tasks sensitive to human amnesia. Behav.
Neurosci. 99, 22–34. doi: 10.1037/0735-7044.99.1.22
Zola-Morgan, S., and Squire, L. R. (1990). The primate hippocampal formation:
evidence for a time-limited role in memory storage. Science (New Y ork, N.Y.)
250, 288–290. doi: 10.1126/science.2218534
Zola-Morgan, S., Squire, L. R., and Amaral, D. G. (1986). Human amnesia and the
medial temporal region: enduring memory impairment following a bilateral
lesion limited to ﬁeld CA1 of the hippocampus. J. Neurosci. 6, 2950–2967. doi:
10.1093/neucas/2.4.259-aw
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was con-
ducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be
construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Received: 14 March 2014; accepted: 24 May 2014; published online: 01 July 2014.
Citation: Fiebig F and Lansner A (2014) Memory consolidation from seconds to weeks:
a three-stage neural network model with autonomous reinstatement dynamics. Front.
Comput. Neurosci.
8:64. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2014.00064
This article was submitted to the journal Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience.
Copyright © 2014 Fiebig and Lansner. This is an open-access article distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution
or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) or licen-
sor are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance
with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted
which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org July 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 64 | 17