

===== PAGE 1 =====
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43939-z
T h er o l eo fe x p e r i e n c ei np r i o r i t i z i n g
hippocampal replay
Marta Huelin Gorriz 1, Masahiro Takigawa 1 &D a n i e lB e n d o r1
During sleep, recent memories are replayed by the hippocampus, leading to
their consolidation, with a higher priority given to salient experiences. To
examine the role of replay in the selective strengthening of memories, we
recorded large ensembles of hippocampal place cells while male rats ran
repeated spatial trajectories on two linear tracks, differing in either their
familiarity or number of laps run. We observed that during sleep, the rate of
replay events for a given track increased proportionally with the number of
spatial trajectories run by the animal. In contrast, the rate of sleep replay
events decreased if the animal was more familiar with the track. Furthermore,
we ﬁnd that the cumulative number of awake replay events occurring during
behavior, inﬂuenced by both the novelty and duration of an experience, pre-
dicts which memories are prioritized for sleep replay, providing a more par-
simonious neural correlate for the selective strengthening of memories.
Memory storage goes through a two-stage process in the brain1. First
behavioral episodes are encoded by the hippocampus, and then dur-
ing sleep, these memories are consolidated, with information initially
stored in the hippocampus gradually transformed into a stable, long-
term memory
2. Neurons in the rodent hippocampus, commonly
referred to as place cells, are spatially tuned andﬁre action potentials
when the animal is positioned within a speciﬁcr e g i o no ft h ee n v i r o n -
ment, known as a place ﬁeld3. As the rodent runs along a spatial tra-
jectory through multiple placeﬁelds, the corresponding place cellsﬁre
in a temporal sequence. During ofﬂine states such as quiet restfulness
and non-REM sleep, these same place cells spontaneously reactivate
this sequential pattern, reinstating a neural memory trace of the spatial
trajectory previously traversed
4,5. The link between hippocampal
replay, memory consolidation, and sleep is supported by extensive
experimental evidence demonstrating (1) a cortico-hippocampal dia-
log during sleep, leading to coordinated replay activity, and (2) a
memory enhancement (or disruption) following a positive (or nega-
tive) manipulation in sleep and/or replay
6–18.
However, not all memories are equally valuable for an animal ’s
survival. For example, the location of a new food cache should take
precedence over other regions in the environment that provide no
beneﬁt to the animal and are less likely to be visited in the future. As
consolidation is a time-limited process, there is an information
bottleneck for memory storage and a need for ef ﬁciency. It is
hypothesized that the brain prioritizes the consolidation of
important and novel memories while delaying or even triaging
memories that are less important to consolidate, leading to their
eventual forgetting
6,19. Furthermore, as memories get more
strongly consolidated, the need to continue consolidating these
memories should decrease, providing more opportunities for the
consolidation of newer memories not yet bene ﬁted from this pro-
cess. Data in humans indicate that memory prioritization is a con-
sequence of an experience ’s salience, which can take multiple
forms, including emotional
20, repetition 21, reward 22,o re v e np e r -
ceived future relevance, such as simply informing participants after
training that the task will be later tested 23. This ability of the brain to
bias memory processing towards more salient experiences requires
sleep; if subjects remained awake following training on a behavioral
task for a similar time period, no bias in-memory processing is
observed
23. Furthermore, if sleep does not occur within the 24-h
period following the behavioral task, any saliency bias in memory is
permanently lost, even with two nights of recovery sleep following
sleep deprivation
24. These data suggest that memories can be
effectively prioritized or triaged, but only within a limited time
window. How this is accomplished by the brain, speci ﬁcally how the
hippocampus tags salient memories during learning for later
prioritization during this sleep window for consolidation is
unknown.
Received: 31 March 2023
Accepted: 24 November 2023
Check for updates
1Institute of Behavioural Neuroscience (IBN), University College London (UCL), London WC1H 0AP, UK. e-mail: d.bendor@ucl.ac.uk
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:8157 1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

===== PAGE 2 =====
Results
We examined hippocampal replay during post-behavior sleep periods
after male rats ( n = 4) ran spatial trajectories on two linear tracks
(Fig. 1A). Following a 1-h sleep period (PRE) in a quiet remote location
(rest box) from the two tracks, the rat ran spatial trajectories on two
novel tracks (RUN1), motivated by a small liquid reward delivered at
each end of the track, every lap. During theﬁrst exposure to the novel
tracks, the two tracks differed in the number of laps the rat was per-
mitted to run (16 laps for track 1, and between 1 –8 laps for track 2).
Next, the rat was returned to the rest box for a 2 h rest/sleep session
(POST1) and then returned back to the same two linear tracks to run
additional spatial trajectories (RUN2). During the re-exposure to the
two linear tracks, the amount of time the rat spent running on each
track was ﬁxed (approximately 15 min/track). However, during RUN2,
the familiarity of the two tracks presumably differed as a consequence
of the number of laps previously run in RUN1 (i.e., always more laps
were previously run on track 1 than track 2). Finally, following RUN2,
t h er a th a da na d d i t i o n a lr e s t / s l e e ps e s s i o ni nt h er e s tb o xf o r1 h
(POST2). This experiment was repeated across 5 days, each with a
d i f f e r e n tl a pc o n d i t i o no nt r a c k2( 1 ,2 ,3 ,4 ,o r8l a p s )d u r i n gR U N 1 .T o
generate novel environments each day, the track geometries and
textures were changed, and the two tracks were repositioned in the
room with new cues (Fig. 1B). The con ﬁgurations of the room (e.g.,
track geometry and placement, barriers for visual occlusion) and lap
conditions were pseudo-randomly ordered for each subject. During
RUN1, the additional laps on track 1 relative to track 2 (Fig. 1Ca n d
Fig S1A), led to an increase in the total time spent immobile (speed
<4 cm/s) (Fig. 1D and Fig. S1B, two-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank test,
p = 0.00013, n = 19) and running (Fig. 1E and Fig. S1C, two-sided Wil-
coxon signed-rank test, p =0 . 0 0 0 1 3 ,n = 19). However, no difference
was observed between the two tracks during the re-exposure session
(RUN2, two-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank test, p = 0.78 for total time
spent immobile and p = 0.26 for time spent mobile, n = 19). Further-
more, across all protocols, the average running speed of the animal
Fig. 1 | Behavioral manipulation of spatial experience. AExperimental design. A
given session started with a 1-h rest period in a remote rest box (PRE) followed by
the ﬁrst exposure to two novel linear tracks (RUN1), differing in the number of laps
allowed to explore (16 laps on Track 1 and between 1 –8l a p so nT r a c k2 ) .A f t e r
RUN1, the rat was allowed to rest for 2 h in the rest pot (POST1) before being re-
exposed to both tracks (RUN2), where rat was allowed run on each track for
approximately 15 min. The session ended with a 1-h rest session (POST2). B The
conﬁguration of both tracks and the rest box (including track geometry and pla-
cement) as well as the number of laps ran on Track 2 during RUN1 were pseudo-
randomized for each rat.C–F Summary of animal behavior during RUN1 and RUN2.
Data points from track 1 (T1) and track 2 (T2) during the ﬁrst exposure (RUN1) are
indicated using orange and light blue, respectively. Data points from track 1 and
track 2 during the second exposure (RUN2) are indicated using red and dark blue.
Error bars are presented as mean ± SD for panels (C–F). ***p < 0.001, two-tailed
Wilcoxon signed-rank test.C Number of laps run for each protocol. ***p =0 . 0 0 0 1 3
for T1 vs. T2 during RUN1 and p = 0.72 for T1 vs. T2 during RUN2. D Time spent
immobile for each protocol. ***p = 0.00013 for T1 vs. T2 during RUN1 and p =0 . 7 8
for T1 vs. T2 during RUN2. E Time spent mobile for each protocol. ***p =0 . 0 0 0 1 3
for T1 vs. T2 during RUN1 and p = 0.26 for T1 vs. T2 during RUN2. F Moving speed
for each protocol. p = 0.94 for T1 vs. T2 during RUN1 and p = 0.97 for T1 vs. T2
during RUN2. n = 19 sessions from 4 rats.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43939-z
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:8157 2

===== PAGE 3 =====
between tracks remained similar (Fig. 1F and Fig. S1D, two-sided Wil-
coxon signed-rank test, p = 0.94 for RUN1 and p =0 . 9 7 f o r
RUN2, n =1 9 ) .
Using chronically implanted microdrives25–27,w er e c o r d e df r o m
large ensembles of place cells during our behavioral task and the cor-
responding sleep sessions. We observed that place cells globally
remapped between tracks27,28, while having similar place ﬁelds on the
same track between RUN1 ( ﬁrst exposure) and RUN2 (re-exposure)
(Fig. 2A, B and Fig. S2). The majority of sessions had at least 50 place
cells per track (Fig. S3A). Using a naïve Bayes decoder, we reconstructed
the rat’s position on each track from theﬁring rates of place cells during
RUN1 and RUN2, and using this same approach we reconstructed the
virtual spatial trajectories within replay events across the entire
recording session. Candidate replay events were selected based on a
minimum duration >= 100 ms, and a z-score threshold of 3 for the
smoothed multi-unit activity across all channels
27 (see Methods). Can-
didate replay events with a z-score > 3 for ripple-band power, and a
statistically signiﬁcant weighted correlation score (p <0 . 0 5 ) f o r t h r e e
different shufﬂe distributions27,29 (see Methods) were considered sig-
niﬁcant replay events and included in our analysis (Fig. 2C). Replay
events during POST1 and POST2 were classiﬁed as replay during puta-
tive sleep state (referred assleepreplay hereafter) if the replay occurred
when the animals’ mean moving speed within a 1-min time bin was lower
than 4 cm/s and thez-scored MUA activity of the most active units (top
one-third of the units in terms of total spike count) was above 0.
Otherwise, they were classiﬁed as rest replay (see Methods).
We ﬁrst examined how the number of laps run during RUN1
inﬂuenced the rate of replay (i.e., the number of replay events per
unit time) that occurred during POST1, focusing on theﬁrst 30 min of
cumulative sleep (see Methods). We selected the ﬁrst 30 min of
cumulative putative sleep as this timeframe represents the longest
minimum duration that all animals attained in most sessions. In
addition, for all animals, the ﬁrst 30 min of cumulative sleep was
distributed similarly across time, independent of the session condi-
tion. Using place ﬁelds in RUN1 to decode POST1 replay events, we
observed that the rate of sleep replay increased with the number of
laps run by the animal (Fig.3A, B). On the ﬁrst track, the rat always ran
16 laps, and correspondingly, sleep replay rates were similar across
protocols and generally higher than track 2 (for which the rat always
ran fewer laps). On track 2, replay rates decreased as the number of
laps was reduced across protocols. We observed a signi ﬁcantly
higher sleep replay rate in POST1 for track 1 compared to track 2
across all protocols (Fig. 3B, T1 and T2 mean ± SD:
T1 = 0.0310 ± 0.01events/s, T2 = 0.0185 ± 0.0077 events/s, two-sided
Wilcoxon signed-rank test, p = 0.0002, n = 19). This difference was
also observed in the proportion of active place cells in replay events
of track 1 and track 2 during POST1 (Fig. S3B).
While both tracks were novel to the rat in RUN1, this was no longer
t h ec a s ei nR U N 2w h e nr a t sw e r er e - e x p o s e dt ot h es a m et r a c k s .W h i l e
the time spent on each track was ﬁxed (approximately 15 min each),
the tracks now varied in their familiarity, given that the rat always has
h a dm o r ep r e v i o u se x p e r i e n c e( n u m b e ro fl a p s )o nt r a c k1r e l a t i v et o
Fig. 2 | Hippocampal remapping across tracks and representational stability
across exposures. ARaster plot of cells spiking activity sorted by their peakﬁring
rate on the track, and the associated decoded posterior probability for example
laps from both tracks. B Cumulative frequency of the population vector (PV) cor-
relations between place ﬁeld maps during RUN1 and RUN2. Lines with different
colors were used to indicate data from different experimental protocols: dark
purple for T1 with 16 laps, magenta for T2 with 8 laps, blue-violet for T2 with 4 laps,
blue-green for T2 with 3 laps, jade green for T2 with 2 laps and green for T2 with 1
lap. Gray lines represent the distributions of the shufﬂed data. C Example neuronal
activity and decoded posterior probability for replay events during POST1 from Rat
2 with a 16-4 laps protocol on track 2 during RUN1.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43939-z
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:8157 3

===== PAGE 4 =====
Fig. 3 | Hippocampal sleep replay increases with repetition but decreases with
familiarity. A Raster plot of signiﬁcant replay events for track 1 (top) and track 2
(bottom) during the pre-exposure rest period (PRE), theﬁrst exposure to track 1
(RUN1 T1) and track 2 (RUN1 T2), the rest period following the ﬁrst exposure
(POST1), the re-exposure to track 1 (RUN2 T1) and track 2 (RUN2 T2) and the ﬁnal
rest period (POST2).B , C Rate of sleep replay for track 1 and track 2 during ﬁrst
30 min of cumulative sleep of POST1 (B)a n dP O S T 2(C). For POST1, the lap number
associated with each track during RUN1 was highlighted in bold. For POST2, the lap
number was not highlighted as the time spent on the two tracks was nearly iden-
tical. Each datapoint represents the mean sleep replay rate within a session, color-
coded according to the experimental protocol and track identity (same as Fig.1C–F
and Fig.2B). ***p = 0.0002 for T1 vs. T2 POST1 sleep replay (B), ***p = 0.002 for T1 vs.
T2 POST sleep replay (C), two-tailed Wilcoxon signed-rank test.n = 19 sessions from
4 rats. Error bars are presented as mean ± SD for panels (B, C). D, E Cumulative sleep
replay bias across protocols during POST1 (D) and POST2 (E). The solid line and the
shaded region represent the mean ± standard deviation across all sessions for a
given protocol. Color scheme according to the experimental protocol (same as
Fig. 2B), The solid line becomes a dashed line when less than half of the animals are
contributing to the data at each time point. The light blue box outlines the ﬁrst
30 min of cumulative sleep time windows used for analysis in B, C.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43939-z
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:8157 4

===== PAGE 5 =====
track 2. Using place ﬁelds from RUN2 to decode POST2 replay events,
we observed that replay rates in the ﬁrst 30 min of cumulative sleep
were signiﬁcantly higher for track 2 compared to track 1, suggesting
that the more familiar track replayed less during periods of putative
sleep (Fig. 3C, T1 and T2 mean ± SD: T1 = 0.0265 ± 0.010 events/s,
T2 = 0.0366 ± 0.011 events/s, two-tailed Wilcoxon signed-rank test
p = 0.002, n = 19). This difference was also observed in the proportion
of active place cells in replay events of track 1 and track 2 during POST2
(Fig. S3B).
To help control for potential changes in replay rates across ses-
sions and subjects, we next calculated the track replay bias, by sub-
tracting the number of track 1 replay events from the number of track 2
replay events within a speci ﬁed time window. Calculating the cumu-
lative track replay bias over time, we observed that the difference in
the number of replay events between track 1 and track 2 grew linearly
in the positive direction (track 1 > track 2) during POST1 sleep periods.
This suggests that the replay bias towards track 1 was present at the
start of the sleep session and was maintained throughout POST1,
beyond the 30 min of cumulative sleep that was used in our main
analysis (Fig.3B, D). Several labs have reported a decay of replay within
the ﬁrst hour of sleep
8,30–32, however, more recently replay has been
reported to last for hours, and even days, after the experience33–36.W e
observed that the rate of sleep replay for both track 1 and track 2 slowly
decayed (with a similar slope) during POST1 (Fig. S4A, B). This indicates
that a constant bias in the rate of sleep replay between tracks during
POST1 can nevertheless still be maintained in spite of an overall
decrease in sleep replay rates over time. Interestingly, the decay in
sleep replay rates differed in slope between tracks during POST2
(Fig. S4C, D), suggesting that decay rates are not alwaysﬁxed and may
depend on behavioral parameters in the task (e.g., familiarity).
We next examined how the track replay bias was affected by
familiarity during POST2, where familiarity increased with the amount
of prior exposure (number of laps) run on the track during RUN1. We
observed a negative track replay bias for periods of sleep across
POST2, indicating that track 2 replayed more than track 1 throughout
POST2 (albeit over a shorter sleep session), with the cumulative change
in bias between track 2 and track 1 more similar between protocols
(Fig. 3C, E). Together, these results suggest that both repetition and
familiarity inﬂuence sleep replay resulting in ( 1) higher replay rates
with more experience on a novel track (more laps), and (2)l o w e rr e p l a y
rates with greater familiarity (i.e., more prior experience on the same
track). Interestingly, we observed a similar qualitative relationship for
repetition and familiarity with rest replay events (Fig. S5), however,
track differences were only statistically signiﬁcant in POST2 (POST1 T1
and T2 mean ± SD: T1 = 0.0186 ± 0.0074, T2 = 0.0160 ± 0.0081, two-
tailed Wilcoxon signed-rank test p =0 . 3 1 6 4 ,n =1 9 ; P O S T 2
T1 = 0.0100 ± 0.0056, T2 = 0.0188 ± 0.0072, two-tailed Wilcoxon
signed-rank test p = 0.0010, n =1 9 ) .
We next investigated whether any additional factors that varied
between tracks could inﬂuence the rate of replay. Although we were
able to decode the trajectories accurately across all protocols (Fig. S2),
the median decoding error generally decreased with the number of
laps run by the animal on a novel track. As an alternative approach, we
measured sleep replay during POST1 using place ﬁelds obtained in
RUN2, which were fully stabilized after 15 min of running on each track.
Using this approach, we observed the identical trend of a higher rate of
track 1 sleep replay (relative to track 2) during POST1 (Fig. S6A). Given
the possibility that the place cell representations may partially remap
between RUN1 and RUN2, we also quantiﬁed sleep replay during POST1
using place ﬁelds calculated from theﬁnal (single) lap for both track 1
and track 2 regardless of the total laps ran. The result remained con-
sistent with the mainﬁnding (Fig. S6B). Because we were limited in the
number of sessions that could be recorded from each animal, we used
a ﬁxed protocol with the rat always running more laps on track 1
compared to track 2, and with track 1 always being theﬁrst track used
in the re-exposure. While it is possible that sleep replay rates increase
with the recency of the behavioral episode to the sleep session (i.e.,
higher replay rates for track 2), previous replay data comparing replay
between two novel tracks with a similar duration of experience sug-
g e s t st h a tt h i si sn o tas i g n iﬁcant effect
27.
How does the hippocampus choose which memories to prioritize
for replay, given that the cues important for this decision (e.g., reward,
repetition, and familiarity) occur during the behavioral episode, and
are no longer present later during sleep? We next explored candidate
neural correlates during behavior that could predict the difference in
sleep replay rates observed during both POST1 and POST2. Both
learning and memory consolidation are postulated to rely on the
phenomenon of theta sequences, the ordered ﬁring of place cells
occurring every theta cycle, encoding spatial trajectories sweeping
from behind to in front of the animal ’sc u r r e n tp o s i t i o n
37.M o r e
recently, it has been shown that impaired theta sequences result in
degraded sleep replay, suggesting that theta sequences may be
necessary for the initial formation of memory traces
17. Alternatively,
the repeated ordered ﬁring of place cells during behavior, postulated
to be necessary for sleep replay to later occur, could instead be pro-
duced during awake replay. This form of replay is qualitatively similar
to sleep replay but typically occurs during behavioral episodes and
outside periods of locomotion-driven theta activity when the animal is
resting, grooming, or consuming reward
38,39. During awake replay, a
spatial trajectory within the local environment typically reactivates,
however, although less frequent, remote replay of an experience
outside of the current environment is also possible
40–43.A w a k er e p l a y
may play multiple functional roles, with evidence supporting both
goal-directed behavior
44,45 and memory function46,47.
First, to examine the role of theta sequences in modulating the
rate of sleep replay, we computed the Bayesian decoded theta cycle
normalized by the animal’s position and duration of the theta cycle,
and observed strengthening of the sequential structure (the decoded
position gradually shifting from behind to in front of the animal) as the
number of laps increased, while theta sequences for both tracks during
RUN2 were qualitatively similar (Fig. 4A). The number of theta
sequences (weighted correlation, p <0 . 0 5 , s e e M e t h o d s ) w a s s i g -
niﬁcantly higher for track 1 compared to track 2 during RUN1 (Fig.4B,
T1 and T2 mean ± SD: T1 = 1546 ± 647 theta sequences, T2 = 263 ± 205
theta sequences, two-tailed Wilcoxon signed rank p = 0.0001, n =1 9 ) ,
matching the pattern of track 1 and track 2 sleep replay during POST 1.
However, we did not observe a signiﬁcant difference in the number of
theta sequences between track 1 and track 2 for RUN2 (Fig.4C, T1 and
T2 mean ± SD: T1 = 1751 ± 753 theta sequences, T2 = 1702 ± 850 theta
sequences, two-tailed Wilcoxon signed-rank testp = 0.5732, n =1 9 ) .
We next examined if local awake replay during the behavioral task
inﬂuenced the rate of sleep replay (see Methods). We observed that the
rate of awake replay was similar across protocols in RUN1, without a
statistically signiﬁcant difference between track 1 and track 2, albeit
w i t ht h er a t eo fa w a k er e p l a yd u r i n gas i n g l el a po nt r a c k2b e i n g
qualitatively much lower than other protocols (Fig. 5A, T1 and T2
mean ± SD: T1 = 0.13 ± 0.042 events/s, T2 = 0.12 ± 0.070 events/s, two-
tailed Wilcoxon signed-rank p =0 . 6 0 ,n = 19). However, the rate of
awake replay was higher for track 2 compared to track 1 during RUN2
(Fig. 5B, T1 and T2 mean ± SD: T1 = 0.086 ± 0.033, T2 = 0.13 ± 0.042,
two-tailed Wilcoxon signed-rank p =0 . 0 0 3 8 ,n = 19), similar to the
relationship of track 1 and track 2 sleep replay during POST2.
Unlike theta sequences which were strengthened with familiarity,
local replay rates on the track decreased with increasing familiarity. We
quantiﬁed this by calculating the population vector correlation
between place cells from the same track between RUN1 and RUN2 and
found a signiﬁcant regression with the rate of local awake replay dur-
ing RUN2 (Fig.5C, R2 = 0.273,p =4 . 4 9×1 0
−4). In other words, the more
the place cells remapped (or were not stable) between RUN1 and RUN2
for a given track, which was more prevalent with less prior experience
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43939-z
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:8157 5

===== PAGE 6 =====
during RUN1, the higher the rate of local awake replay. These results
support previous work reporting that more reactivations occur during
behavioral episodes for novel environments compared to familiar
ones48–50.
Thus far, theta sequence number and awake replay rate were
unable to explain the combined effect of repetition and familiarity/
novelty on sleep replay. However, we speculated that the cumulative
number of awake replay events should differ between tracks in RUN1,
much like theta sequences, as a consequence of time spent on the
track. Furthermore, the cumulative number of awake replay events
should also be sensitive to familiarity during RUN2, as a consequence
of awake replay rates decreasing with familiarity, and a similar time
spent on each track (15 min each). We observed that for RUN1, awake
replay number was signiﬁcantly higher for track 1 compared to track 2
(Fig. 6A, T1 and T2 mean ± SD: T1 = 53.1 ± 35.5, T2 = 9.5 ± 8.5, two-tailed
Wilcoxon signed-rank test p = 0.0001, n = 19), while the opposite was
true for RUN2, with track 2 having signi ﬁcantly more awake replay
events than track 1 (Fig. 6B, T1 and T2 mean ± SD: T1 = 37.5 ± 17.0,
T2 = 56.1 ± 20.8, Signed rank test p =0 . 0 0 1 3 ,n = 19). Thus, unlike our
observation for theta sequences and awake replay rate, the cumulative
number of local awake replay events RUN1 and RUN2 better mirrored
the pattern of track 1 and track 2 sleep replay during both POST1
(T1 > T2) and POST2 (T1 < T2), respectively.
To further explore the role of theta sequence and awake replay in
shaping sleep replay rate, we applied a linear regression analysis to
identify the factors that could more universally predict the rate of
sleep replay during both POST1 and POST2. Using a simple regression
analysis, we found that the time spent on a track due to task manip-
ulation (Fig. 7A, R2 = 0.347, p =1 . 3×1 0
8, n = 76), as well as all the three
candidate neural correlates were predictive of the rate of sleep replay
(Fig. 7B–D, number of theta sequence: R2 = 0.390, p =1 . 0 2×1 0−9,
n = 76, rate of awake replay: R2 = 0.219,p = 1.2 × 10−5, n = 76, number of
awake replay: R2 = 0.554, p =7 . 9×1 0−15, n = 76). Extending our regres-
sion analysis to look more broadly at theta cycles and awake sharp-
wave ripple (SWR) events (see Methods), the predictive relationships
remained signiﬁcant for both number of theta cycles and awake SWR
events (but not awake SWR rate) (Fig. 7E–G, number of theta cycle:
R2 = 0.338, p =2 . 2 2×1 0
−8, n = 76, rate of awake SWR events:
R2 = −0.013, p =0 . 8 0 6 ,n = 76, number of awake SWR events:
R2 = 0.497, p =7 . 2 7×1 0−13, n = 76). While all three metrics showed a
statistically signiﬁcant regression with sleep replay rate, it is plausible
that these three neural correlates exert different degrees of inﬂuence
on sleep replay, or alternatively may be a byproduct of any collinearity
across behavioral protocols. Therefore, we next sought to examine the
relative contribution of theta sequences and awake replay toward
sleep replay rate using a mixed-effect linear regression analysis. The
model used the three candidate neural correlates as well as the time
spent on track as the ﬁx e de f f e c t sa n di n c l u d e dt h es u b j e c ti da st h e
random effect to account for animal variability. All metrics were z-
scored such that the standardized beta coef ﬁcient could be used to
compare the relative weight of each ﬁxed-effect term. We calculated
the 95% conﬁdence interval for the standardized beta coefﬁcient such
t h a tt h er e l a t i v ep r e d i c t i v ep o w e ro ft h em e t r i cw o u l db ec o n s i d e r e d
statistically insigniﬁcant when it overlapped with zero. We found that
only the standardized beta coefﬁcient of rate and cumulative number
o fa w a k er e p l a yw e r es i g n iﬁcantly greater than zero (Fig. 7H), high-
lighting the relative importance of awake replay in explaining sleep
replay. If alternatively, we only used theta cycles and SWR events
during behavior, metrics that rely on oscillatory activity but not place
cell sequences (thus not sensitive to the size of the place cell
Fig. 4 | Number of theta sequences increases with the repetition of trajectories
but are insensitive to contextual novelty and familiarity. AAveraged theta
sequences per protocol. Each plot represents the averaged decoded probabilities
of three consecutive theta sweeps over 80 cm. The sequences are centered in the
trough of the theta cycle and the animal’s current position on the x-axis and the y-
axis, respectively. The hotness of the color indicates the magnitude of the decoded
probabilities.B, C Number of theta sequence on track 1 and track 2 during RUN1 (B)
and RUN2 (C) for each protocol. The lap number associated with each track during
RUN1 was made in bold. The lap number was not highlighted as the time spent on
the two tracks was nearly identical. Each datapoint represents the mean theta
sequence for a given track within a session, color-coded according to the experi-
mental protocol and track identity (same as Fig.1C–F and Fig. 2B). ***p =0 . 0 0 0 1f o r
T1 vs. T2 RUN1 theta sequence (B), p = 0.57 for T1 vs. T2 RUN2 theta sequence (C),
two-tailed Wilcoxon signed-rank test.n = 19 sessions from 4 rats. Error bars are
presented as mean ± SD for panels B, C.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43939-z
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:8157 6

===== PAGE 7 =====
ensemble), we found that only the standardized beta coefﬁcient for the
cumulative number of awake SWR events was signiﬁcantly greater than
zero (Fig. 7I). Interestingly, in contrast to sleep replay, the rate and
cumulative number of awake replay events but not theta sequences
were predictive of rest replay during the POST sessions (Fig. S7A–G).
Using a mixed-effect regression analysis, awake replay number
remained the best predictor of rest replay with a signi ﬁcant standar-
dized beta coefﬁcient (Fig. S7H). Therefore, while these results do not
eliminate a possible role for theta sequences in sleep replay, especially
when the environment was novel, the prioritization of of ﬂine sleep
replay was more parsimoniously explained across our entire dataset by
the cumulative number of awake replay events.
To further validate our observation that a higher number of local
awake replay events during a behavioral episode resulted in a higher
priority for this spatial trajectory to subsequently replay during sleep,
we extended our analysis to individual place cells. We examined only
place cells with place ﬁelds on both tracks, and asked whether the
difference in the number of local awake replay events a given cell
participates in (track 1 – track 2) during RUN, predicts the observed
difference in sleep replay rates for that cell (track 1– track 2) during the
subsequent POST session. We observed a signiﬁcant regression in 18
out of 19 POST1 sleep sessions and 16 out of 19 POST2 sleep sessions
(Fig. S8), indicating that the more times a cell participates in the replay
of a given track, the more likely that cell is to participate during the
sleep replay of that track. To con ﬁrm that the result is not trivially
explained by the overall ﬁring rate on the track and during sleep or
decoding accuracy, we further applied a decoding-independent ana-
lysis. Instead of using Bayesian decoding, we classiﬁed SWR events as
either track 1 or track 2 reactivation events when the proportion of one
of the track’s selective place cells was 20% greater than the proportion
Fig. 6 | Local awake replay number increases with repetition but decreases with
familiarity. A, B Number of local awake replay on track 1 and track 2 during RUN1
(A)a n dR U N 2(B) for each protocol. Each datapoint represents the mean number of
local awake replay for a given track within a session, color-coded according to the
experimental protocol and track identity (same as Fig.1C–Fa n dF i g .2B).***p =
0.00013 for T1 vs. T2 RUN1 awake replay number, ***p = 0.0013 for T1 vs. T2 RUN2
awake replay number, two-tailed Wilcoxon signed-rank test.n = 19 sessions from 4
rats. Error bars are presented as mean ± SD for panels A, B.
Fig. 5 | Rate of local awake replay is sensitive to contextual novelty and
familiarity. A, B Rate of local awake replay on track 1 and track 2 during RUN1 (A)
and RUN2 (B) for each protocol. Each datapoint represents the mean local awake
replay rate for a given track within a session, color-coded according to the
experimental protocol and track identity (same as Fig.1C–Fa n dF i g .2B). p =0 . 6 0
for T1 vs. T2 RUN1 awake replay rate ( A), ***p = 0.0038 for T1 vs. T2 RUN2 awake
replay rate (B), two-tailed Wilcoxon signed-rank test). The lap number associated
with each track during RUN1 is indicated in bold. In RUN2, the lap number is not
highlighted as the time spent on the two tracks is similar.n = 19 sessions from 4 rats.
Error bars are presented as mean ± SD for panels (A, B). C Regression between the
population vector correlation between exposures and the rate of local awake replay
during RUN2. The rate of local awake replay during RUN1 for each session is plotted
on the x-axis at position 0 for visualization purposes only. n = 38 datapoint from
both tracks during RUN2 of 19 sessions (4 rats).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43939-z
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:8157 7

===== PAGE 8 =====
Fig. 7 | The predictive relationship between the awake replay, theta sequences,
and sleep replay. A–G Linear regression of behavioral or neural metric and rate of
POST sleep replay during ﬁrst 30 min of cumulative sleep. A Time spent on track.
B Number of theta sequence. C Awake replay rate. D Awake replay number.
E Number of theta cycles. F Awake SWR rate. G Awake SWR number. n =7 6d a t a
points from both tracks during RUN1 and RUN2 of 19 sessions (4 rats). Each data-
point is color-coded according to the experimental protocol and track identity
(same as Fig. 1C–F). H, I Mixed-effect regression for the relationship between
candidate neural correlates and sleep replay.H place cell sequences. I Oscillatory
events. Each bar indicates the magnitude of the standardized beta coefﬁcient
associated with different factors with the error bar showing the estimated 95%
conﬁdence interval. Asterisks (*) where the 95% conﬁdence interval of the stan-
dardized beta coefﬁcient does not overlap with 0. See the source data associated
with this ﬁgure for more information about the models.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43939-z
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:8157 8

===== PAGE 9 =====
from the other track (where a track selective cell only had a placeﬁeld
on one of the tracks). Next, using place cells with place ﬁelds on both
tracks (a non-overlapping population), we quantiﬁed the difference in
ﬁring rate and participation between track 1 and track 2 events during
PRE, RUN, and POST SWR events. We observed that place cell ﬁring
(e.g., ﬁring rate difference or participation track difference) during
awake SWR events could explain ﬁring during POST SWR events but
not during PRE SWR events (Fig. S9). These results collectively suggest
that the relationship between the number of awake the replay and the
rate of replay during post-experience sleep is highly conserved for
individual neurons, regardless of their magnitude ofﬁring rate on the
track or overall level of participation during sleep replay.
Discussion
Here we have examined two factors that are postulated to in ﬂuence
which memories are prioritized during consolidation- (1) repetition,
which we varied by controlling the number of laps run by the rat in a
single waking bout, and that when increased resulted in a higher rate
of sleep replay during POST1, and (2) familiarity, which varied as a
result of the number of laps run by the rat in the previous behavioral
episode (RUN1), and when increased resulted in a lower rate of sleep
replay in POST2. The effects of prior experience on familiarity may be
inﬂuenced by the amount of time elapsed between RUN1 and RUN2,
and whether or how much time the animal slept during this period,
however, these were not varied parametrically in our experiments.
We observed that the number of theta sequences increased with the
number of laps run by the rat during RUN1, but were unaffected by
differences in familiarity during RUN2. In contrast to this, the rate of
awake replay was not modulated during RUN1 by the number of laps
run by the rat, however, during RUN2, awake replay rate decreased as
the prior experience on the track increased (greater familiarity). The
change in sleep replay rate for both POST1 (repetition change) and
POST2 (familiarity change), while not fully explained by the rate of
awake replay or the number of theta sequences, could be most
robustly predicted by the cumulative number of awake replay events
(Fig. S10). Furthermore, we observed at the level of individual place
cells, that the more awake replay events a cell participated in (for a
given track), the more likely it would participate in subsequent sleep
replay events of that track. Together these data suggest that a
memory will be prioritized to be replayed during sleep if there has
previously been more awake replay of this memory, cumulatively
over the behavioral episode, with the repetition of an experience and
the novelty of the context as factors that can generate more awake
replay. While the number of theta sequences and local awake replay
events tend to be correlated, in general, we would speculate an
important distinction- given that theta sequences occur at a much
higher number than awake replay events, they provide a more rea-
listic mechanism for the synaptic strengthening across cell assem-
blies, a likely prerequisite for subsequent sleep replay
17,51,52. However,
once enough theta sequences have occurred for sleep replay to
manifest, awake replay likely becomes the more important factor
in deciding which memories should be prioritized or triaged
during sleep.
Awake replay provides a possible mechanism for explaining how
a cue during a behavioral episode can drive online changes that lead
to the later prioritization of the memory during sleep replay when
this cue is no longer present
53. Importantly, reward, emotion, and
novelty have all been implicated as drivers for an increased rate of
awake replay, suggesting that awake replay rates increase with the
salience of an experience or the need to update the cognitive
map
38,41,48,54,55. However, even when reward or novelty is lower, longer
duration or more repetitive experiences can still lead to more sleep
replay and stronger memories
21,56, because while the overall rate of
awake replay can be lower, this is compensated by an increased time
period during the behavior when awake replay can occur. It is
important to note that our data does not address whether repetition
of the spatial trajectory, overall time of the behavioral episode, and/
or time inactive during which awake replay normally occurs are key
factors modulating sleep replay, as they were largely interdependent
in our experimental design. Furthermore, because the animal
received a reward for each spatial trajectory, it is dif ﬁcult to dis-
ambiguate between their direct relationship with replay rate. While
physical reward can be measured, the subjective value of the spatial
trajectory (which may change with novelty and satiety) is challenging
to evaluate, and may even change across the behavioral episode.
Finally, one key feature of awake replay, not previously observed with
theta sequences, is the ability of the hippocampus to reactivate a
remote environment while the animal is awake and able to process
new cues
40. Previous work has demonstrated that remote awake
replay can be in ﬂuenced by external cues, such as when an observer
rat watches a demonstrator rat running a spatial trajectory, which can
trigger the replay of the same trajectory ﬁrst experienced by the
observer rat
57. Given that human memories can be selectively
strengthened during sleep when human subjects are instructed after
training that only a subset of the task will be rewarded
22,23, there must
be a mechanism by which memories can be tagged post hoc to
receive a higher priority for consolidation
58. We would postulate that
when new information is provided after the behavioral task,
increasing its future relevance, awake remote replay of the task could
theoretically occur, leading to the prioritization of this memory
during sleep replay, which would result in a stronger memory post-
consolidation. While we cannot discount the possibility that awake
replay may also serve other functions, including planning and
memory storage
44–47,55, it is also possible that these are simply a
byproduct of what part of the cognitive map needs to be tagged to
ensure the most ef ﬁcient prioritization during sleep.
A fundamental question remains-h o wd o e sa w a k er e p l a yt a ga
memory, subsequently leading to its prioritization during sleep replay.
Which memory replays during sleep at a given moment is likely a
stochastic process, however, the probability of a salient memory
replaying could still be increased by the brain. We have previously
proposed that this bias can be the direct consequence of the increased
excitability of cortical neurons that represent the behavioral episode
59.
Recent evidence suggests that the neocortex in ﬂuences what the
hippocampus replays during sleep 8,13,15. During sleep, epochs of
increased cortical activity (up states) precede epochs of increased
hippocampal activity (frames) during which replay occurs
8.F u r t h e r -
more, the content of cortical activity prior to a sharp-wave ripple can
be used to predict what the hippocampus will replay
15. Similarly, pre-
senting a task-related cue such as a sound, presumably directly driving
auditory cortex, will increase the likelihood that the spatial trajectory
related to this cue subsequently replays
13. Together, these data indi-
cate that cortical activity at the start of a cortical upstate in ﬂuences
which memories can replay. Likewise, if cortical circuits representing a
memory have an increased excitability during sleep (speciﬁcally during
t h eu p s t a t e ) ,t h e ym a yi nt u r nh a v eam o r ei nﬂuential vote on what the
hippocampus replays, prioritizing this memory for consolidation.
If an increase in excitability within a cortical circuit is required to
prioritize a memory for replay during sleep, then how does awake
replay play a role in this process? One possibility is that awake replay
may occur alongside the reactivation of neuromodulatory pathways
(e.g., dopamine), to allow the of ﬂine potentiation of co-activated
cortical circuits. This appears to be an important distinction between
awake and sleep replay, given that the coordinated replay between the
VTA and hippocampus has been observed in awake but not sleeping
animals
60. However, this potentiation is likely temporary, as given that
the rate of replay decreases over the cumulative sleep (Fig. S4A, B), the
potentiating effects of awake replay on sleep replay rate should
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43939-z
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:8157 9

===== PAGE 10 =====
diminish with sufﬁcient sleep such that a memory progressively loses
its priority for replay. This provides a potential feedback mechanism
for the memory triage process where the more a memory replays, the
more its replay rate is decreased, effectively de-prioritizing a memory
that has sufﬁciently replayed.
Methods
The data presented are from four male Lister Hooded rats [Rat 1 (Q-
BLU), Rat 2 (P-ORA), Rat 3 (N-BLU), Rat 4 (M-BLU)]. Prior to surgery,
rats were housed in pairs and kept at 90% of free-feeding weight with
free access to water. The housing room was maintained at a tem-
perature of 22 ± 2 °C, 55 ± 10% of humidity, and on a 12-h light/dark
cycle. All procedures were carried out during the light phase of the
cycle in order to facilitate sleep during the rest sessions. All experi-
mental procedures and post-operative care were approved and carried
out in accordance with the UK Home Ofﬁce, subject to the restrictions
and provisions contained in the Animals (Scienti ﬁc Procedures) Act
of 1986.
Behavioral protocol
Prior to the start of recordings, rats were trained for approximately
two days, 30 min each, to run back and forth on a linear track with
reward delivered at each end. Training occurred in a different room
and track from the one used during the recordings. The training period
was extended further if required. We designed a 5-day experiment
where each day consisted of one recording session where the animal
underwent one out of ﬁve possible protocols. In each protocol, rats
encountered two novel tracks and were allowed to run back and forth
for a variable number of laps (with running the entire length of the
track back and forth considered a single lap), with a reward consisting
of chocolate-ﬂavored milk delivered at each end of the track. The
protocols differed in the number of laps the rat had to run on the
second track, which was always less than the ﬁrst track.
A given recording session started with a 1-h sleep period in which
the animals were allowed to sleep in the rest box. The rest box con-
sisted of a circular enclosure with walls 50 cm tall and with a towel
placed at the bottom, to which the animals had been previously
habituated. Next, rats were exposed for theﬁrst time to the two novel
tracks. These ﬁrst exposures were separated by 10-min rest in the rest
box to facilitate discrimination between the experiences correspond-
ing to each track. In theﬁrst track (T1), rats always ran 16 laps back and
forth. The number of laps ran on T1 was constant across all ﬁve pro-
tocols and was used as a control. In the second track (T2), rats ran a
lower number of laps, which varied between 1, 2, 3, 4, or 8 laps. The
number of laps run on T2 changed every day and the order was
pseudo-randomized for each animal. After theﬁrst exposure to T1 and
T2, the animals were immediately placed back into the rest box and
were allowed a 2-h sleep period to consolidate the experience. To
ensure that place ﬁeld stability was achieved for each track, rats were
exposed for a second time to the same tracks. This time, animals were
allowed to run for 15 min on each track, a sufﬁc i e n ta m o u n to ft i m ef o r
acquiring a stable hippocampal representation of the track
61.A s
before, both exposures were separated by a 10-min rest in the rest box.
As a ﬁnal step, rats were allowed to sleep for another hour.
Experimental setup
A key element of the protocol was to ensure the animals encountered a
new environment and two novel tracks every day. With that goal in
mind, we designed a modular maze consisting of wooden planks of
medium-densityﬁberboard (MDF) cut to different sizes. Pieces of MDF
could be attached together into different conﬁgurations using wooden
dowels, thus easily creating multiple track shapes using the same
pieces. All rats were exposed to the same track shapes, with the order
pseudo-randomized across sessions and tracks. This was done to
minimize any potential effect of a particular track shape on the results
of the experiment. To facilitate tracking and prevent slipping, the MDF
pieces were painted with gripping black paint (Blackfriar, UK) and
sprayed with matt black paint (Hycote, UK). To further ensure hippo-
campal remapping across days and tracks (i.e., to ensure tracks were
different enough to be recognized as such), we used a variety of tex-
tures to cover the tracks and also made use of distal visual cues hanged
on the walls to simulate different rooms. Additionally, large vertical
polypropylene black sheets were used as panels to divide the room,
thus creating the illusion of sub-rooms and changing the overall spatial
conﬁguration of the room across days. The whole recording setting
was surrounded by black curtains mounted on the ceiling and lit up
with dimmable blue LED strips (CPC, 12 V).
The behavioral task was automated using custom-made software
with Bonsai (https://bonsai-rx.org//) and Arduino board ( http://www.
arduino.cc/). The software monitored the position of the animal
through four webcams placed in the ceiling (Logitech C930E 1080p
HD Webcam) and controlled the delivery of the liquid reward by
activating the infusion pumps (dual Aladdin, WPI) upon the animal ’s
entry in the region of interest set near the reward wells, at each end of
the track.
Electrophysiological recordings
A large-scale independently movable microdrive array was used to
record single units
62. The design of the microdrive was modi ﬁed to
both improve ﬂexibility and reduce weight, to increase the number of
tetrodes, and to duplicate the number of targeted areas. Rat 2 (P-ORA)
was implanted with a dual-hippocampal microdrive, while the three
remaining were implanted with a microdrive targeting both the dorsal
hippocampus and primary visual cortex (V1).
The body of both types of microdrive was designed using an
online 3D modeling software (Vectary Inc.) and later 3D-printed
(Form2 3D printer, Formlabs). Each microdrive contained 24 inde-
pendently movable tetrodes carried inside two polyimide tubes: an
inner (ID: 0.0035 ”; OD: 0.0055 ”,I W G )a n do u t e r( I D :0 . 0 0 7 1”;O D :
0.0116”, IWG). The outer polyimide contained the inner one, and it was
used as a guide tube to direct the inner polyimide through the body of
the microdrive. The inner polyimide was glued to both the tetrode and
the movable screw, allowing the tetrode to slide up and down while
protecting it from bending during the movement. The dual-
hippocampal microdrive had two outputs with 12 tetrodes each that
targeted the hippocampal region in each hemisphere. For the
hippocampal-visual cortex microdrive, 16 tetrodes were used to
record from the hippocampal area, while the remaining 8 tetrodes
targeted the visual cortex. Tetrodes were assembled using four twisted
tungsten microwires (12 µm diameter, Tungsten 99.95% CS, CFW),
individually gold-plated to <200 kΩ impedance (NanoZ, White Matter
LLC). To protect the microdrive and achieve a better grounding, we
designed a cone that could both contain the microdrive and act as a
Faraday cage. The structure of the cone was built from aluminum foil
glued into a plastic sheet, and grounded to the Electrode Interface
Board (EIB) of the microdrive through a soldered wire.
Surgical procedure
For the surgical implantation of the microdrive, rats were induced and
maintained under isoﬂurane anesthesia (1.5–3% at 2 L/min). Carprofen
(0.1 mL/100 g animal weight in a solution of 1:10, P ﬁzer Ltd, UK) and
Baytril (10 mg/Kg, Bayer) were given pre-surgically to prevent pain and
infection. Following the induction of anesthesia, the animals were
shaved and placed on the stereotaxic frame with ear bars. After dis-
infecting the skin with antiseptic (Betadine) and saline, an incision was
made to expose the skull, which was carefully cleaned with 10%
hydrogen peroxide diluted in phosphate-buffered saline and a phos-
phoric acid-based etching gel agent (37.5%, Gel Etchant) to improve
bonding to dental acrylic. Throughout the surgery the animal’sb o d y
temperature was kept constant with a heating pad.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43939-z
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:8157 10

===== PAGE 11 =====
For rats implanted with the hippocampal-visual cortex microd-
rive, the craniotomy aimed at the pyramidal cell layer in the CA1 area
of the right dorsal hippocampus, targeted the coordinates (from
bregma: ML = 2.5 mm, AP = 3.72 mm). For the rat implanted with the
double-hippocampal microdrive, bilateral craniotomies were made
above the dorsal hippocampal CA1 cell layer with coordinates (from
bregma: ML = +/−2.5 mm, AP = −3.72). Two small metal screws with a
soldered wire were placed in the frontal right parietal bone and the
right occipital bone (above the cerebellum), where they served as
reference and ground, respectively. Extra screws were added in
strategic positions in the skull to act as an anchor for the implant. The
microdrive and screws were ﬁxed in place using metabond (Super
Bond C&B) and dental acrylic (Simplex Rapid ®, Kemdent, UK).
Finally, the skin was sutured and the animal was left to recover in a
heated chamber and monitored until fully recovered all motor
functions and the ability to drink and eat. As post-surgical care, rats
were administered with low doses of analgesics (Metacam, 1.5 mg/mL
Oral Suspension for Dogs 10 mL, Boehringer Ingelheim) during 72 h.
Animals were housed individually and allowed to recover with food
and water ad libitum for a week, before returning to being kept at
90% of their free-feeding weight.
After recovery, implanted rats were screened for hippocampal
single units by gradually lowering the tetrodes until reaching the CA1
pyramidal cell layer. Neuronal activity and position data were acquired
with a 96-channel digital acquisition system (Neuralynx, DigitalLynx).
The signals were pre-ampli ﬁed and digitized on the head-stage at a
sampling rate of 30 kHz. Local ﬁeld potential and spikes were then
band-pass ﬁltered in the Neuralynx acquisition unit at 0.1 Hz and
600 Hz–6000 Hz, respectively. Video tracking was acquired at 25 fps
using a camera also connected to the Neuralynx acquisition device,
while two LEDs mounted in the head-stage were used to infer head-
direction and position of the animal. Once tetrodes reached CA1,
recording sessions started.
Upon completion of the experiments, animals were deeply
anaesthetized with isoﬂurane (3% isoﬂu r a n ew i t ha no x y g e nﬂow rate
of 2 L/min) and the locations of the recording sites were marked with
electrolytic lesions by passing current through an electrode of each
tetrode (10 s, 30 µA). Animals were then terminated via an intraper-
itoneal injection of a lethal dose of Euthatal (0.5 mL/100 g, sodium
pentobarbital) and perfused transcardially with saline (0.9% sodium
chloride solution) followed by 10% Formalin. The ﬁxed brains were
then removed from the skull while carefully extracting the implanted
microdrive, and post-ﬁxed in 10% Formalin at 4 °C for a minimum of
48 h. Next, the brains were placed in a container with 30% sucrose
solution to achieve cryoprotection. Once the brains sunk in the con-
tainer, they were mounted on a block with Optimum Cutting Tem-
perature (OCT) and sectioned coronally with a cryostat (Leica, CM1850
UV) at a thickness of 30 µm. The obtained brain slices were then wet-
mounted onto superfrost plus slides (Thermo Scientiﬁc), Nissl-stained,
and coverslipped using DPX mounting media (Sigma Aldrich). Finally,
slices were examined under a Leica DMi8 microscope in order to
detect the tetrodes track reaching into the hippocampal CA1 pyr-
amidal layer. Whole-slice images were obtained using bright-ﬁeld set-
tings at 25X magniﬁcation.
Spike sorting and unit isolation
Spiking data was sorted using the semi-automatic clustering software
KlustaKwik 2.0 (K.Harris,http://klustakwik.sourceforge.net/)a n dt h e n
manually curated with Phy-GUI ( https://github.com/kwikteam/phy).
Putative single units were isolated based on the spike waveform, auto-
correlograms, and their stability across the recording session. The rest
of the clustered activity was classi ﬁed in either multi-unit activity
or noise.
Position data was collected by tracking the LEDs attached to the
head-stage during recordings. The instantaneous speed was calculated
as the derivative of the position data. Tracking errors due to large
reﬂections or transient failure to detect the head-stage ’s LED were
cleaned ofﬂine by (1) constraining tracking areas around the track ’s
and rest box ’s area; (2) removing large jumps between consecutive
pixels by setting a maximum distance jump of 40 cm; (3) setting a
speed threshold of 100 cm/s. All discarded position points and their
corresponding timestamps were then linearly interpolated. Cleaned
tracking and speed data were next converted from pixels to cm/s and
linearized from a two-dimensional coordinate into a single coordinate
(x, the distance traveled along the track).
Local ﬁeld potential analysis
The power spectral density (PSD) of the hippocampal LFP was quan-
tiﬁed using Welch’s method (pwelch, MATLAB) with 2 s windows with
50% overlap for the entire session. The PSD was used to identify the
channels with higher power for theta (4 –12 Hz) and ripple
(125–300 Hz) oscillations, as well as the channel with the largest dif-
ference in normalized theta to ri pple power. The LFP of the selected
channels was down-sampled from 30 kHz to 1 kHz and band-passed
ﬁltered in forward and reverse directions in order to avoid phase
delays (MATLAB command ﬁltﬁlt). The instantaneous phases were
estimated using the Hilbert transform.
Putative sleep quantiﬁcation
Putative sleep was deﬁned by periods of immobility (windows of 60 s
with velocity lower than 4 cm/s) accompanied by transient periods of
high multi-unit activity ( z-score greater than 0). In order to reduce
noise levels when setting the multi-unit activity (MUA) threshold, only
the most active units (top 1/3 units in terms of total spike counts) were
used. To account for intrasubject variability, both the velocity and
MUA threshold were visually checked for each data and session and
corrected if needed. As a control, we compared our putative sleep
detection method with one based on the LFP activity, as it has been
commonly used in other studies
34,63. For each session, we calculated
the LFP theta/delta ratio based on the channels with higher theta and
delta power, respectively. Awake periods were classi ﬁed as high z-
scored theta power (>0.5) and high velocity (>4 cm/s). NREM periods
were characterized by low z-scored theta power (<0.5), low mobility
(<4 cm/s) and high z-scored theta/delta ratio (>0.5), while REM sleep
periods were classi ﬁed as high z-scored theta power (>0.5), low
mobility (<4 cm/s) and high z-scored theta/delta ratio (>0.5). For the
purposes of this analysis, NREM and REM periods were merged, and
then compared to the putative sleep periods obtained with our
detection method. The putative sleep detected periods with each
method were highly correlated (mean all sessions = 0.51 ± 0.15, with a
mean p-value < .001 ± 0.002).
Place cell classiﬁcation
Putative principal hippocampal cells were identiﬁed by selecting units
with a half-width half max (HWHM) larger than 500µs and mean ﬁring
rate <5 Hz across the entire recording session. For place cell classi ﬁ-
cation, spike trains were speed- ﬁltered to only include the spiking
activity between 4 cm/s and 50 cm/s. A principal cell was classiﬁed as a
spatially selective place cell if it had a minimum peak ﬁring rate that
was >1 Hz in its unsmoothed ratemap for at least one of the two linear
tracks.
To generate ﬁring ratemaps (the spike histogram divided by the
total dwell time at each position bin), the position data was discretized
in 2 cm bins for visualization and plotting, and 10 cm bins for Bayesian
decoding. Only raw (unsmoothed) ratemaps were used for all Bayesian
decoding analyses.
Bayesian decoding of animal’s spatial trajectory
A naïve Bayesian decoding algorithm was applied to reconstruct the
estimated position of the animal during behavior and replay events
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43939-z
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:8157 11

===== PAGE 12 =====
based CA1 hippocampal spiking activity64:
PðxjnÞ = CP ðxÞ
YN
i =1 f iðxÞni
/C16/C17
exp /C0 τ
XN
i =1
f iðxÞ
 !
ð1Þ
where P(x|n) is the probability of the animal being at a speciﬁc position
given the observed spiking activity,C is a normalization constant,x is
the animal’sp o s i t i o n ,fi(x)i st h eﬁring rate of theith place ﬁeld at a given
location x,a n d n is the number of spikes in the time window τ.T h e
normalization constant was de ﬁned as the summed posterior prob-
abilities across both tracks for ﬁrst exposure and second exposure
separately. We used non-overlapping temporal windows of 250 ms to
decode the animal ’s location while running on the track, 20 ms
windows to decode replay events, and 10 ms windows to decode theta
sequences.
The decoding error was deﬁned as the difference between the real
location of the animal and the estimated position with maximum
likelihood. The decoding accuracy of each session was analyzed by
quantifying the confusion matrices of the median decoding error.
Sessions with a decoding error higher than 15 cm in the re-exposures
were discarded.
Detection of replay event
Replay trajectories were decoded using a Bayesian decoding algorithm,
as described in Tirole et al. (2022)27. Detection of candidate sharp-wave
ripple (SWR) associated replay events was based on the thresholds set
on both multi-unit activity (MUA) and ripple-band power. MUA wasﬁrst
binned into 1 ms steps and smoothed with a Gaussian Kernel
(sigma = 5 ms). Only MUA bursts with a maximum duration of 300 ms
and z-scored activity over 3 were included. Next, the ripple-band
ﬁltered LFP signal was smoothed with a 0.1 s moving averageﬁlter, and
calculated the amplitude of ripple-bandﬁltered signal using the Hilbert
transform. The candidate replay event was required to pass ripple
threshold set at z-score of 3. Candidate replay events passing both
thresholds were next speed-ﬁltered (above 5 cm/s), and discarded if the
events involved less than 5 different units active or if their duration was
below 100 ms or above 750 ms. Therefore, each event should contain
at leastﬁve 20 ms time bins for decoding. Events detected within 50 ms
of each other were combined.
Replay events were classiﬁed as rest, sleep, or awake local replay.
Local awake replay was de ﬁned as replay events where its decoded
track identity matched the track on which the animal was currently on.
Replay events during POST1 and POST2 were classiﬁed as sleep replay
if they occurred when animals’ mean moving speed within a 1-min time
bin was lower than 4 cm/s accompanied by transient periods of high
multi-unit activity (z-score greater than 0), otherwise they were clas-
siﬁed as rest replay. For some analyses that examined the relationship
between awake SWR events and sleep replay, candidate SWR events
before decoding were used. To classify a given candidate replay event
as signiﬁcant for a given track, we quantiﬁed the weighted correlation
of the posterior probability matrix, which calculates the correlation
coefﬁcient between time ( T) and decoded position ( P)b yw e i g h t i n g
each estimated position by its decoded probability (prob):
Weighted mean:
mðx; probÞ =
PM
i =1
PN
j =1 probij xi
PM
i =1
PN
j =1 probij
ð2Þ
Weighted covariance:
covðx, t; probÞ =
PM
i =1
PN
j =1 probij ðxi /C0 mðx; probÞÞðtj /C0 mð y; probÞÞ
PM
i =1
PN
j =1 probij
ð3Þ
Weighted correlation:
corr ðx, t; probÞ = covðx, t; probÞﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
covðx, x; probÞcovðt, t; probÞ
p ð4Þ
Where xi is the ith position bin, tj is the jth time bin and probij is the
probability at the position bin i and time bin j.
To determine the statistical signiﬁcance of the replay events, we
compared each candidate event’s weighted correlation score to three
different shufﬂed distributions:
1. Spike train circular shift, in which the spike count vectors for each
cell were independently circularly shifted in time within each
replay event, prior to decoding.
2. Place ﬁeld shift, in which each ratemap was circularly shifted in
space by a random amount of position bins prior to decoding.
3. Circular shift of position, in which posterior probability vectors
for each time bin were independently circularly shifted by a ran-
dom amount.
If the score of the candidate event was greater than the 95th
percentile of the distribution for all three shufﬂes then the event was
considered to be signi ﬁcant. In a few occasions, replay events were
found to be signi ﬁcant for both tracks (hereafter referred as multi-
tracks events). The mean proportion of multi-tracks events duringﬁrst
exposure and re-exposure were 0.0431 ± 0.0048 and 0.0571 ± 0.0047,
respectively. Those events were assigned to one of the tracks by
computing the Bayesian bias score for each track. Each score was
calculated as the sum of the posterior probability matrix for one track,
normalized by the total sum across tracks. To assign the replay event
to a speciﬁc track, the Bayesian bias score was required to be greater
than 60%, otherwise the event was discarded. We do not think the
proportion of multi-track events is high enough to have any major
impacts on our ﬁndings.
To optimize the detection of replay events and avoid discarding a
minority of events due to noisy decoded probability at the beginning
or the end of the event, candidate replay events were split into two
segments where the midpoint was determined based on the minimum
MUA activity in the middle third of the candidate event. Halved seg-
ments were decoded and analyzed for statistical signi ﬁcance inde-
pendently if they passed the same selection criteria described above
with the exception of the p-value threshold adjusted to p <0 . 0 2 5 t o
account for multiple comparisons.
Sleep replay activity was analyzed over the ﬁrst 30 min of cumu-
lative sleep (in all ﬁgures unless explicitly indicated), to allow a
balanced comparison between POST1 and POST2 sleep. To calculate
the average rate of sleep replay, we divided the number of replay
events over 30 min of cumulative sleep by 30 min. For local awake
replay, we ﬁrst counted the total number of local replay events
occurring on the linear track and divided the number of events by the
total amount of time spent immobile (period when speed <4 cm/s) to
calculate the average rate of local awake replay.
Detection of theta sequences
Theta cycles were detected using a peak-trough detection method. A
sliding window was used to search for extrema within a voltage
range, which was set to be 25% of the median amplitude of the total
signal across the session (code based on online scripthttp://nocurve.
com/virtual-lab/ﬁnding-peaks-and-troughs-in-a-noisy-curve/). Con-
secutive peaks and troughs were deleted by selecting the maximum
extrema. Theta cycles were speed- ﬁltered (below 5 cm/s) and exclu-
ded if they occurred in the reward zone (within 20 cm from each end
of the track). Cycles shorter than 80 ms or longer than 200 ms were
discarded. Theta phase was calculated extracting the angle from the
Hilbert transform and binned into windows of 2 π length (equivalent
to a complete cycle). Next, spike phases were extracted through
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43939-z
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:8157 12

===== PAGE 13 =====
linear interpolation and assigned to each window. Theta windows
with less than 2 active units were excluded. Phase bin edges from
each window were then interpolated back to time and spike
sequences contained within each time window were decoded using a
naïve Bayesian decoder (described above). Theta sequences were
decoded for each running direction, using directional ratemaps, and
repeated on a lap-by-lap basis using the smoothed ratemaps from the
corresponding lap. The resulting posterior probability matrix for
each sequence was then centered on the animal ’s current location
(±40 cm), such that the actual position of the rat in the window was at
0 cm. All decoded sequences for one running direction were next
reversed in order to average all the posterior probability matrices
across all theta cycles.
Similar to replay detection, theta sequence was quantiﬁed using
weighted correlation. The signiﬁcance of theta sequences was deter-
mined by comparing the obtained score to three different shuf ﬂed
distributions:
(1) Spike train circular shift, a pre-decoding shuf ﬂet h a ta l t e r st h e
spike timing of each cell within theta sequence by circularly
shifting the spike times in the temporal dimension;
(2) Circular shift of position, which circularly shifts the estimated
positions within a time bin,
(3) Circular shift of decoded theta phase, which disrupts the phase
domain by circularly shifting the estimated phase in each position
bin, but maintains the relationship between position and spike
probability.
If the score of the candidate theta sequence event was greater
than the 95th percentile of the distribution for all three shuf ﬂes then
t h ee v e n tw a sc o n s i d e r e dt ob es i g n iﬁcant.
Simple and mixed-effect linear regression analysis
Simple linear regression was used to quantify the predictive relation-
ship between the metric of interest and the rate of subsequent sleep
replay for track 1 and track 2 events across both exposure sessions
(MATLAB functionﬁtlm). To further examine the relative magnitude of
the effects of different neural and behavioral variables to the rate of
sleep replay, we applied mixed-effect linear regression analysis
(MATLAB function ﬁtlme). For the effect of awake replay and theta
sequence on sleep replay, we ﬁtted a mixed-effect model for sleep
replay rate with the rate and number of local awake replay, the number
of theta sequence, and the total time spent on the track asﬁxed effects
and animal identity as a random effect:
Sleep replay rate ~ rate of awake replay + number of awake
replay + number of theta sequence + total time spent on the track + (1/
animal).
For the effect of awake SWR and theta cycles on sleep replay, we
ﬁtted a mixed-effect model for sleep replay rate with the rate and
number of local awake SWR events, the number of theta cycles, and
total time spent on the track as ﬁxed effects and animal identity as
random effect:
Sleep replay rate ~ rate of awake SWR events + number of awake
SWR events + number of theta cycles + total time spent on the
track + (1/animal).
All metrics were converted into standardized z-scores such that
the standardized beta coefﬁcient can be used to compare the relative
weight of each ﬁxed-effect term. We calculated the 95% con ﬁdence
interval for the standardized beta coef ﬁcient such that the relative
predictive power of the metric would be considered statistically
insigniﬁcant when it overlapped with zero.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
Data availability via a public repository is delayed due to this dataset’s
use in several manuscripts in preparation. However, all data are avail-
able immediately upon reasonable request to the corresponding
author. Source data are provided in this paper.
Code availability
All custom-written MATLAB code is available on Zenodo: https://doi.
org/10.5281/zenodo.10085294.
References
1. Buzsaki, G. Two-stage model of memory trace formation: a role for
‘noisy’ brain states. Neuroscience31, 551–70 (1989).
2. Frankland, P. W. & Bontempi, B. The organization of recent and
remote memories.Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6, 119–30 (2005).
3. O ’Keefe, J. & Dostrovsky, J. The hippocampus as a spatial map.
Preliminary evidence from unit activity in the freely-moving rat.
Brain Res. 34,1 7 1–5( 1 9 7 1 ) .
4. Wilson, M. A. & McNaughton, B. L. Reactivation of hippocampal
ensemble memories during sleep.Science 265,6 7 6–9 (1994).
5. Lee, A. K. & Wilson, M. A. Memory of sequential experience in the
hippocampus during slow wave sleep.Neuron 36, 1183–94
(2002).
6. Stickgold, R. Sleep-dependent memory consolidation. Nature 437,
1272–1278 (2005).
7. Marshall, L., Helgadóttir, H., Mölle, M. & Born, J. Boosting slow
oscillations during sleep potentiates memory.Nature 444,
610–613 (2006).
8. Ji, D. & Wilson, M. A. Coordinated memory replay in the visual cortex
and hippocampus during sleep.Nat. Neurosci.10,1 0 0–107 (2007).
9. Rasch, B., Büchel, C., Gais, S. & Born, J. Odor cues during slow-wave
sleep prompt declarative memory consolidation.Science 315,
1426–1429 (2007).
10. Girardeau, G., Benchenane, K., Wiener, S. I., Buzsaki, G. & Zugaro, M.
B. Selective suppression of hippocampal ripples impairs spatial
memory. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 1222–3( 2 0 0 9 ) .
11. Rudoy, J. D., Voss, J. L., Westerberg, C. E. & Paller, K. A. Strength-
ening individual memories by reactivating them during sleep.Sci-
ence 326,1 0 7 9–1079 (2009).
12. Diekelmann, S. & Born, J. The memory function of sleep. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 11, 114–126 (2010).
13. Bendor, D. & Wilson, M. A. Biasing the content of hippocampal
replay during sleep. Nat. Neurosci. 15,1 4 3 9–44 (2012).
14. Silva, D., Feng, T. & Foster, D. J. Trajectory events across hippo-
campal place cells require previous experience.Nat. Neurosci. 18,
1772–9( 2 0 1 5 ) .
1 5 . R o t h s c h i l d ,G . ,E b a n ,E .&F r a n k ,L .M .Ac o r t i c a l–hippocampal–cortical
loop of information processing during memory consolidation.Nat.
Neurosci.20,2 5 1–259 (2017).
1 6 . C o u s i n s ,J .N . ,E l - D e r e d y ,W . ,P a r k e s ,L .M . ,H e n n i e s ,N .&L e w i s ,P .A .
Cued reactivation of motor learning during sleep leads to overnight
changes in functional brain activity and connectivity.PLoS Biol. 14,
e1002451 (2016).
17. Drieu, C., Todorova, R. & Zugaro, M. Nested sequences of hippo-
campal assemblies during behavior support subsequent sleep
replay. Science 362,6 7 5–679 (2018).
18. Fernández-Ruiz, A. et al. Long-duration hippocampal sharp wave
ripples improve memory.Science 364,1 0 8 2–1086 (2019).
1 9 . C o w a n ,E .T . ,S c h a p i r o ,A .C . ,D u n s m o o r ,J .E .&M u r t y ,V .P .M e m o r y
consolidation as an adaptive process.Psychon. Bull. Rev. 28,
1796–1810 (2021).
2 0 . B a r a n ,B . ,P a c e - S c h o t t ,E .F . ,E r i c s o n ,C .&S p e n c e r ,R .M .C .P r o -
cessing of emotional reactivity and emotional memory over sleep.J.
Neurosci. 32,1 0 3 5–1042 (2012).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43939-z
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:8157 13

===== PAGE 14 =====
21. Hintzman, D. L. in Psychology of Learning and Motivation(ed. Bower,
G. H.) Vol. 10. 47–91 (Academic Press, 1976).
22. Braun, E. K., Wimmer, G. E. & Shohamy, D. Retroactive and graded
prioritization of memory by reward.Nat. Commun. 9,4 8 8 6( 2 0 1 8 ) .
23. Wilhelm, I. et al. Sleep selectively enhances memory expected to
be of future relevance. J. Neurosci. 31,1 5 6 3–1569 (2011).
24. Rauchs, G. et al. Sleep contributes to the strengthening of some
memories over others, depending on hippocampal activity at
learning. J. Neurosci. 31,2 5 6 3–2568 (2011).
25. Kloosterman, F. et al. Micro-drive array for chronic in vivo recording:
drive fabrication.J. Vis. Exp. e1094 https://doi.org/10.3791/
1094 (2009).
26. Nguyen, D. P. et al. Micro-drive array for chronic in vivo recording:
tetrode assembly.J. Vis. Exp. e1098 https://doi.org/10.3791/
1098 (2009).
27. Tirole, M., Huelin Gorriz, M., Takigawa, M., Kukovska, L. & Bendor, D.
Experience-driven rate modulation is reinstated during hippo-
campal replay. eLife 11, e79031 (2022).
28. Leutgeb, S. et al. Independent codes for spatial and episodic
memory in hippocampal neuronal ensembles.Science 309,
619–623 (2005).
29. M. Takigawa, M. Huelin Gorriz, M. Tirole, & D. Bendor. Evaluating
hippocampal replay without a ground truth.bioRxivhttps://doi.org/
10.1101/2022.12.12.520040(2022).
3 0 . K u d r i m o t i ,H .S . ,B a r n e s ,C .A .&M c N a u g h t o n ,B .L .R e a c t i v a t i o no f
hippocampal cell assemblies: effects of behavioral state, experi-
ence, and EEG dynamics. J. Neurosci. 19,4 0 9 0–4101
(1999).
31. Ramírez-Amaya, V. et al. Spatial exploration-induced arc mRNA and
protein expression: evidence for selective, network-speciﬁcr e a c -
tivation. J. Neurosci. 25,1 7 6 1–1768 (2005).
32. Eschenko, O., Ramadan, W., Mölle, M., Born, J. & Sara, S. J. Sus-
tained increase in hippocampal sharp-wave ripple activity during
slow-wave sleep after learning.Learn Mem. 15, 222–228 (2008).
33. Ribeiro, S. et al. Long-lasting nov elty-induced neuronal reverbera-
tion during slow-wave sleep in multiple forebrain areas.PLoS Biol.
2, e24 (2004).
3 4 . G i r i ,B . ,M i y a w a k i ,H . ,M i z u s e k i ,K . ,C h e n g ,S .&D i b a ,K .H i p p o c a m p a l
reactivation extends for severalhours following novel experience.
J. Neurosci. 39,8 6 6–
875 (2019).
35. Gridchyn, I., Schoenenberger, P., O ’Neill, J. & Csicsvari, J.
Assembly-speciﬁc disruption of hippocampal replay leads to
selective memory deﬁcit. Neuron 106,2 9 1–300.e6 (2020).
36. Grosmark, A. D., Sparks, F. T., Davis, M. J. & Losonczy, A. Reactiva-
tion predicts the consolidation of unbiased long-term cognitive
maps. Nat. Neurosci. 24,1 5 7 4–1585 (2021).
37. Foster, D. J. & Wilson, M. A. Hippocampal theta sequences. Hip-
pocampus 17,1 0 9 3–1099 (2007).
38. Foster, D. J. & Wilson, M. A. Reverse replay of behavioural sequen-
ces in hippocampal place cells during the awake state.Nature 440,
680–3( 2 0 0 6 ) .
39. Diba, K. & Buzsaki, G. Forward and reverse hippocampal place-cell
sequences during ripples.Nat. Neurosci. 10,1 2 4 1–2( 2 0 0 7 ) .
4 0 . K a r l s s o n ,M .P .&F r a n k ,L .M .A w a k er e p l a yo fr e m o t ee x p e r i e n c e si n
the hippocampus.Nat. Neurosci. 12,9 1 3–8 (2009).
4 1 . A m b r o s e ,R .E . ,P f e i f f e r ,B .E .&F o s t e r ,D .J .R e v e r s er e p l a yo fh i p -
pocampal place cells is uniquely modulated by changing reward.
Neuron 91, 1124–1136 (2016).
42. Shin, J. D., Tang, W. & Jadhav, S. P. Dynamics of awake
hippocampal-prefrontal replay for spatial learning and memory-
guided decision making.Neuron 104, 1110–1125.e7 (2019).
43. Xu, H., Baracskay, P., O ’Neill, J. & Csicsvari, J. Assembly responses
of hippocampal CA1 place cells predict learned behavior in goal-
directed spatial tasks on the radial eight-arm maze.Neuron 101,
119–132.e4 (2019).
44. Pfeiffer, B. E. & Foster, D. J. Hippocampal place-cell sequences
depict future paths to remembered goals.Nature 497,7 4–9
(2013).
45. Widloski, J. & Foster, D. J. Flexible rerouting of hippocampal replay
sequences around changing barriers in the absence of global place
ﬁeld remapping. Neuron 110,1 5 4 7–1558.e8 (2022).
46. Gillespie, A. K. et al. Hippocampal replay re ﬂects speciﬁcp a s t
experiences rather than a plan for subsequent choice.Neuron
109,
3149–3163.e6 (2021).
4 7 . C a r e y ,A .A . ,T a n a k a ,Y .&v a nd e rM e e r ,M .A .A .R e w a r dr e v a l u a t i o n
biases hippocampal replay content away from the preferred out-
come. Nat. Neurosci. 22,1 4 5 0–1459 (2019).
48. Cheng, S. & Frank, L. M. New exp eriences enhance coordinated
neural activity in the hippocampus.Neuron 57,3 0 3–313 (2008).
49. O ’Neill, J., Senior, T. J., Allen, K., Huxter, J. R. & Csicsvari, J. Reac-
tivation of experience-dependent cell assembly patterns in the
hippocampus.Nat. Neurosci. 11,2 0 9–215 (2008).
50. Hwaun, E. & Colgin, L. L. CA3 place cells that represent a novel
waking experience are preferentially reactivated during sharp
wave-ripples in subsequent sleep.Hippocampus29,
921–938 (2019).
5 1 . G e o r g e ,T .M . ,d eC o t h i ,W . ,S t a c h e n f e l d ,K .L .&B a r r y ,C .R a p i d
learning of predictive maps withSTDP and theta phase precession.
eLife 12,e 8 0 6 6 3( 2 0 2 3 ) .
52. Theodoni, P., Rovira, B., Wang, Y. & Roxin, A. Theta-modulation
drives the emergence of connectivity patterns underlying replay in
a network model of place cells. eLife 7, e37388 (2018).
53. Schapiro, A. C., McDevitt, E. A., Rogers, T. T., Mednick, S. C. &
N o r m a n ,K .A .H u m a nh i p p o c a m p a lr eplay during rest prioritizes
weakly learned information and predicts memory performance.
Nat. Commun. 9,3 9 2 0( 2 0 1 8 ) .
54. Singer, A. C. & Frank, L. M. Rewarded outcomes enhance reacti-
vation of experience in the hippocampus.Neuron 64,
910–921 (2009).
55. Momennejad, I., Otto, A. R., Daw, N. D. & Norman, K. A. Of ﬂine
replay supports planning in human reinforcement learning.eLife 7,
e32548 (2018).
56. Zhan, L., Guo, D., Chen, G. & Yang, J. Effects of repetition learning
on associative recognition over time: role of the hippocampus and
prefrontal cortex.Front. Hum. Neurosci.12, 277 (2018).
5 7 . M o u ,X . ,P o k h r e l ,A . ,S u r e s h ,P .&J i ,D .O b s e r v a t i o n a ll e a r n i n gp r o -
motes hippocampal remote awake replay toward future reward
locations.Neuron 110,8 9 1–902.e7 (2022).
58. Lesburguères, E. et al. Early tagging of cortical networks is required
for the formation of enduring associative memory.Science 331,
924–928 (2011).
5 9 . L e w i s ,P .A .&B e n d o r ,D .H o wt a r g e t e dm e m o r yr e a c t i v a t i o np r o -
motes the selective strengthening of memories in sleep.Curr. Biol.
29,R 9 0 6
–R912 (2019).
60. Gomperts, S. N., Kloosterman, F. & Wilson, M. A. VTA neurons
coordinate with the hippocampal reactivation of spatial experience.
eLife 4,e 0 5 3 6 0( 2 0 1 5 ) .
6 1 . F r a n k ,L .M . ,S t a n l e y ,G .B .&B r o w n ,E .N .H i p p o c a m p a lp l a s t i c i t y
across multiple days of exposure to novel environments.J. Neu-
rosci. 24,7 6 8 1–7689 (2004).
62. Davidson, T. J., Kloosterman, F. & Wilson, M. A. Hippocampal replay
of extended experience.Neuron 63, 497–507 (2009).
6 3 . M u e s s i g ,L . ,L a s e k ,M . ,V a r s a v s k y ,I . ,C a c u c c i ,F .&W i l l s ,T .J .C o o r -
dinated emergence of hippocampal replay and theta sequences
during post-natal development.Curr. Biol. 29,8 3 4–840.e4
(2019).
64. Zhang, K., Ginzburg, I., McNaughton, B. L. & Sejnowski, T. J. Inter-
preting neuronal population activity by reconstruction: uniﬁed fra-
mework with application to hippocampal place cells.J.
Neurophysiol.79,1 0 1 7–1044 (1998).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43939-z
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:8157 14

===== PAGE 15 =====
Acknowledgements
We thank Margot Tirole, Sophie Renaudineau, Lilia Kukovska, Julieta
Campi, and Joanna Holeniewska for technical assistance; members of
the Bendor Lab for valuable discussion; and Soraya Dunn and Tom Wills
for their comments on the manuscript. This work was supported by the
European Research Council starter grant (CHIME) (D.B.), the Human
Frontiers Science Program Young Investigator Award (RGY0067/2016)
(D.B.), the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council
Research grant (BB/T005475/1) (D.B.) and the Medical Research Council
scholarship (MR/N013867/1) (M.T.). The Titan Xp used for this research
was donated by the NVIDIA Corporation.
Author contributions
M.H.G. and D.B. designed the experiment, M.H.G. collected the data,
M.H.G. contributed to methodological development, M.H.G. and M.T.
analyzed the data, D.B., M.H.G., and M.T. wrote the initial draft, M.T. and
D.B. revised the manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary informationThe online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43939-z.
Correspondenceand requests for materials should be addressed to
Daniel Bendor.
Peer review informationNature Communications thanks the anon-
ymous reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
A peer review ﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regards to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional af ﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visithttp://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© Crown 2023
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43939-z
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:8157 15