

===== PAGE 1 =====
RESEARCH ARTICLE NEUROSCIENCE
BIOPHYSICS AND COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY
OPEN ACCESS
Two-factor synaptic consolidation reconciles robustness with
pruning and homeostatic scaling
Georgios Iatropoulosa,1 ID , Wulfram Gerstnera, and Johanni Breaa ID
Edited by Donald Pfaﬀ, Rockefeller University, New York, NY; received November 4, 2024; accepted October 2, 2025
Memory consolidation refers to a process of engram reorganization and stabilization
that is thought to occur primarily during sleep through a combination of neural
replay, homeostatic plasticity, synaptic maturation, and pruning. From a computational
perspective, however, this process remains puzzling, as it is unclear how to incorporate
the underlying mechanisms into a common mathematical model of learning and
memory. Here, we propose a solution by deriving a self-supervised consolidation model
that uses replay and two-factor synapses to encode memories in neural networks in
a way that maximizes the robustness of cued recall with respect to intrinsic synaptic
noise. We show that the dynamics of this optimization make the connectivity sparse and
offer a uniﬁed account of several experimentally observed signs of consolidation, such
as multiplicative homeostatic scaling, task-driven synaptic pruning, increased neural
stimulus selectivity, and preferential strengthening of weak memories. The model also
reproduces developmental trends in connectivity and stimulus selectivity better than
previous models. Finally, it predicts that intrinsic synaptic noise ﬂuctuations should
scale sublinearly with synaptic strength; we ﬁnd support for this in a meta-analysis of
published synaptic imaging datasets.
memory consolidation| structural synaptic plasticity| attractor neural networks| sleep|
synaptic volatility
The ability to store and retrieve remote memory is thought to rely on a distributed
network of neurons located primarily in the cortical areas of the brain (1–4). This view
is supported by anatomical studies, showing that cortical circuits are highly recurrent
and, thus, particularly conducive to information storage (5–7). In an effort to unify these
ﬁndings, models of long-term memory are today often based on the concept of attractor
networks (8). The basic idea of this approach is to represent local cortical circuits with
a recurrent neural network, in which each memory corresponds to a distinct pattern of
activity that acts as an attractor of the network’s dynamics (9, 10).
In this context, memory encoding is modeled by conﬁguring the connections of the
network to imprint activity patterns as stable attractors. When this is done optimally,
memory storage is saturated and the network reaches critical capacity (11, 12). This state
is particularly signiﬁcant. In a series of recent studies, attractor networks operating close
to critical capacity have been shown to mimic several dynamical and structural motifs
observed in cortical circuits, thereby suggesting that optimal storage is an organizing
principle of cortical connectivity (13–16). However, it is unclear how such optimality
can emerge in biology, and the precise role of synaptic plasticity in this process remains
unknown.
In the experimental literature, the process whereby memories are stabilized and
reshaped for long-term storage is generally referred to as consolidation. This takes
place mainly during sleep (17) and is believed to be effected by a combination of
neurophysiological mechanisms: Shortly after an initial episode of learning, cortical
circuits undergo early tagging (18) and an immature engram is formed (19). This is
accompanied by a rapid growth of new dendritic spines (20, 21). During sleep, the
cortical engram is stabilized by replaying past neural activity (22–24) while task-irrelevant
connections are pruned (21, 25, 26). At the same time, surviving synaptic connections
are collectively scaled down (27–29) in order to maintain ﬁring rate homeostasis (30).
Notably, this regulation is multiplicative and, thus, preserves the relative differences
between synapses (31).
Many of these aspects are neglected in standard attractor network models. Although
phenomenological models have demonstrated that isolated aspects of consolidation, such
as replay (32, 33), pruning (34), and homeostasis (35, 36), are beneﬁcial for memory and
learning, a principled account of the consolidation process within a common theoretical
framework is lacking.
Signiﬁcance
While most experiences are
forgotten after only a few days,
some memories can last an entire
lifetime. The neurophysiological
mechanisms that enable such
memory preservation are poorly
understood but are believed to
be active during sleep, when
neurons replay past events,
prune their synapses, and
regulate their firing. We provide a
unified mathematical explanation
for these processes in the form of
an algorithm that stores
memories in neural networks
with maximal noise robustness.
By representing each synapse as
a product of two factors, our
model automatically removes and
tunes appropriate connections,
while homeostatically scaling
each neuron’s input. Our model
reproduces experimental signs of
activity-dependent rewiring and
long-term memory formation in
synaptic, cortical, and
psychological data, and oﬀers
testable predictions.
Author aﬀiliations: aSchool of Life Sciences and School
of Computer and Communication Sciences, École
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne 1015,
Switzerland
Author contributions: G.I., W.G., and J.B. designed
research; G.I. performed research; G.I. contributed new
reagents/analytic tools; G.I. analyzed data; and G.I., W.G.,
and J.B. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no competing interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Copyright © 2025 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.
This open access article is distributed under Creative
Commons Attribution License 4.0 (CC BY).
1To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email:
georgios.iatropoulos@gmail.com.
This article contains supporting information online
at https://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.
2422602122/-/DCSupplemental.
Published October 31, 2025.
PNAS 2025 Vol. 122 No. 44 e2422602122 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2422602122 1 of 10
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by EPFL SISB BIBLIOTEQUE on November 7, 2025 from IP address 128.178.116.106.


===== PAGE 2 =====
Here, we derive a normative synaptic plasticity model that
reconciles the various biological mechanisms of consolidation
with the notion of critical capacity in attractor networks.
Our derivation is fundamentally based on a reformulation of
the problem of critical capacity in two ways: First, instead
of considering optimality to be a maximization of storage
capacity (13–16), we deﬁne it as a maximization of memory
robustness. Second, we assume that synapses are products of
multiple subsynaptic components which form the expression
sites for synaptic plasticity (36–39). The result is a self-supervised
plasticity model that uses a combination of replay, homeostatic
scaling, and Hebbian plasticity to prune connections and shape
the network to perform noise-tolerant memory recall. The
model offers a simple explanation for a wide range of putative
consolidation effects observed in synaptic, neural, and behavioral
data.
Results
We construct our consolidation model in three steps: First, we
introduce a speciﬁc parameterization of synaptic strength. Then,
we deﬁne memory robustness. Finally, we combine these two
parts to derive a learning rule that dictates how synapses should
be modiﬁed to maximize memory robustness, that is, consolidate
memory.
The Circuit and Synapse Model. We model a local circuit of
cortical pyramidal cells using a recurrent network ofN excitatory
binary neurons (Fig. 1 A). At every discrete time step t, each
neuron i = 1, . . . , N is characterized by an output state si(t),
which represents a brief period of elevated (si = 1) or suppressed
ﬁring ( si = 0), similar to “up” and “down” states (40). The
elevated state ( si = 1) occurs only if the neuron’s total input
current Ii(t) exceeds zero. The input current evolves in time
according to
Ii(t + 1) =
N∑
j=1
wijsj(t)− Iinh,i(t), [1]
where the ﬁrst term corresponds to the excitatory synaptic input
from all neighboring neurons andwij≥ 0 denotes the connection
strength from neuron j to i (SI Appendix , Circuit Model ). The
second term is a scalar that represents the summed effect of
all inhibitory inputs, as inhibitory neurons are not explicitly
included in the model of the circuit.
In our mathematical analysis of the storage properties of the
network, we focus on the connection strengths wij. We begin
by noting that the functional strength of a biological synapse
(measured, for instance, as the amplitude of the postsynaptic
potential) is an aggregate quantity that is determined by the
interaction of several protein complexes that combine to form
the internal synaptic structure (41). When long-term plasticity is
induced, structural and chemical changes cascade throughout this
molecular interaction network, causing the concentration and
conﬁguration of each component to be altered over the course of
seconds to hours (42). This ultimately increases or decreases the
synapse’s functional strength.
We model this internal synaptic structure by expressing each
weight wij as the product of z subsynaptic components (factors)
uijk, where k = 1, . . ., z, so that
wij =
z∏
k=1
uijk . [2]
1 2 3 4
Synaptic components (z)
0
1
2Noise scaling (q)
Consolidation
model
Synaptic
noise
Neural noise
Input current
Signal
Noise
Threshold
CUE
RESET
Robust 
inactivation
Robust 
activation
Time
Output
A
C D
B
Fig. 1. General model schematics. ( A) Diagram of the circuit model. We
consider a recurrent network of binary excitatory neurons with plastic
nonnegative connection weights (gray). Note that inhibitory neurons are not
explicitly modeled. Instead, inhibition is represented by a neuron-specific
scalar input current Iinh,i (blue) that also undergoes plasticity. (B) Diagram of
the synapse model. The total connection weight wij is a product of z factors
uij1, . . ., uijz that represent the eﬀicacy of subsynaptic components, e.g.,
release probability (blue), receptor density (green), and scaﬀolding protein
content (brown, orange). ( C) Illustration of input current dynamics during
idleness (white background) and recall (pink background) in a single neuron.
The SNR during recall of a pattern is determined by the deflection of the
mean input current from threshold, relative to the fluctuations caused by
noisy aﬀerent neurons or synapses. ( D) The noise scaling exponent q as a
function of z for neural and synaptic noise. Consolidation withz components
maximizes robustness with respect to noise of type q = 2/z, which is
equivalent to neural noise when z = 1, and synaptic noise when z = 2.
Each variable uijk can be seen as the relative concentration of one
or more subcellular building-blocks that are necessary to form a
functional connection, for instance, the average concentration
of released neurotransmitters or the density of postsynaptic
receptors and scaffold proteins (Fig. 1 B; see also SI Appendix ,
Synapse Model and ref. 36). We speciﬁcally consider one of the
synaptic components ( uij1) to be a ﬂexible plasticity tag that is
more volatile and sensitive to noise, while the remaining z− 1
components represent more stable molecular processes that are
active only during consolidation, consistent with tagging-and-
capture dynamics (43, 44) (SI Appendix, Extended Synaptic Noise
Analysis).
Consolidation with Homeostatic Scaling, Synaptic Pruning, and
Replay. We deﬁne consolidation as the process of optimally
storing a set of M memories, where each memory corresponds to
a pattern of stationary network activity in which a speciﬁc group
of neurons is active, while the rest is silent. The desired output of
neuron i in pattern  = 1, . . ., M is deﬁned by 
i , which is one
with probability f ≤ 0.5 and zero otherwise. We parameterize
the storage load using the ratio = M /N (where c denotes the
highest possible load).
Prior to consolidation, the network is assumed to have
undergone an initial episode of learning that has imprinted all
patterns as stable attractors, albeit with suboptimal robustness. At
this stage, patterns can only be recalled if the network operates
2 of 10 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2422602122 pnas.org
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by EPFL SISB BIBLIOTEQUE on November 7, 2025 from IP address 128.178.116.106.


===== PAGE 3 =====
A
G H I J
B
C F
D E
Fig. 2. Simulated consolidation in networks with multifactor synapses. ( A) Diagram of one replay cycle of the consolidation model, implemented in discrete
time. ( B) The gating function gi. This determines the amplitude and sign of plasticity induction after replay of a single pattern ( SI Appendix , Consolidation
Algorithm). (C) The learning rate Gi. This determines the amount of plasticity expression after a full replay cycle and depends on the accumulated signal∑
|gi|.
(D) SNR (mean over 103 neurons) for diﬀerent combinations of noise scaling q and components z, at /c = 0.08. Weights are normalized to ∑
j wq
ij = 1, and
the maximal SNR, for a given q, is scaled to one. ( E) Connection density. Circles represent simulations (mean over 103 neurons) while dashed lines represent
theoretical solutions (SI Appendix, Theoretical Solutions). The light gray area marks the connection probability (mean± SEM) among cortical pyramidal cells in a
meta-analysis of 124 experimental datasets from mice, rats, cats, and ferrets (16) (SI Appendix, Data Analysis). (F) Left: distribution of nonpruned weights [mean
normalized to 0.1, colors as in (E)]. For distributions of all weights, see SI Appendix, Fig. S1. Right: the second synaptic components (uij2) plotted as a function of
the first (uij1) in a simulated neuron with z = 2, at /c = 0.33. (G) Illustration of neural noise. Each row of boxes represents binary input patterns at discrete
time steps (gray = noise-free; red = distorted). (H) Left: SNR with respect to neural noise ( q = 2; the noise level is parameterized by fnoise; SI Appendix, Noise
Scaling). Right: highest level of tolerated neural noise in tests of pattern recall ( SI Appendix, Numerical Optimization and Evaluation ). (I) Illustration of synaptic
noise, which directly perturbs synaptic strengths. ( J) Left: SNR with respect to synaptic noise ( q = 2− 2/z; the noise level is parameterized by noise). Right:
highest level of tolerated synaptic noise in tests of pattern recall. All results in this figure are produced with f = 0.5, but there is no qualitative change with
low-activity patterns (SI Appendix, Fig. S2).
with very low levels of noise. The purpose of consolidation is
now to tune all connections so as to maximize robustness and
allow patterns to be successfully recalled under much noisier
conditions.
We deﬁne robustness as the largest amount of noise that can
be tolerated by the neural population before an error occurs
during recall (Fig. 1 C). This is determined by the signal-to-
noise ratio (SNR) of the weakest pattern. We can maximize
this by having each neuron independently maximize a neuron-
speciﬁc SNR where the signal is the amplitude of the input
current deﬂection at the time the weakest pattern is recalled, i.e.
min|I 
i| = min|∑N
j wij
j − Iinh,i| (SI Appendix , Memory
Robustness). Through iterative weight changes, the weakest
pattern of neuroni will become more robust, and another pattern
will then become the weakest and used to maximize the SNR.
This process continues, until the lowest SNR across all patterns
converges to a maximum.
The noise of the SNR is determined by the magnitude of
random ﬂuctuations in the input current. This varies depending
on the source of noise that causes the ﬂuctuations. Here, we
expand on a previous analysis (45) and distinguish between two
types of noise: neural noise and synaptic noise. Neural noise
refers to perturbations of the neural states (thes-variables) caused
either by the encounter of distorted stimuli or by faulty neural
output activity (i.e., ﬁring below the threshold or failing to ﬁre
above the threshold). Synaptic noise, on the other hand, refers to
perturbations in the connectivity that, for example, are produced
by spontaneous chemical reactions, conformational changes, or
protein degradation and turnover (46, 47). We model these
perturbations as white noise added to the volatile component
uij1 in each connection (SI Appendix, Noise Scaling).
Input ﬂuctuations caused by neural noise are proportional to√∑
j w2
ij and are therefore dependent on synaptic weight but
not on the synaptic structural parameter z. The magnitude of
synaptic noise, however, depends both on synaptic weight and
structure, by scaling as
√∑
j w2−2/z
ij (SI Appendix, Noise Scaling).
We can therefore write a general expression for the SNR as
SNR∝ min|I 
i|√∑
j wq
ij
, [3]
where the scaling exponent q is 2 for neural noise and 2− 2/z
for synaptic noise (Fig. 1 D). The SNR can, in principle, be
optimized (up to an arbitrary scaling factor) by any consolidation
process that a) maximizes the signal and b) maintains a constant
synaptic “mass”∑
j wq
ij. The second property, however, requires
a homeostatic weight regulation that is inhomogeneous across
weights and, as such, directly at odds with the multiplicative
homeostatic plasticity that has been observed experimentally (31)
(SI Appendix , Geometric Interpretation ). We resolve this issue
by optimizing the SNR in terms of each neuron’s subsynaptic
components uijk, instead of directly treating the whole weightwij.
PNAS 2025 Vol. 122 No. 44 e2422602122 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2422602122 3 of 10
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by EPFL SISB BIBLIOTEQUE on November 7, 2025 from IP address 128.178.116.106.


===== PAGE 4 =====
This results in the following three-step process (Fig. 2 A; see
Materials and Methods and SI Appendix, Consolidation Algorithm
for more details):
1. Plasticity induction: All patterns are replayed. For each pattern
, the network receives a cue and is updated (Eq. 1) so
that recall occurs. This triggers a plasticity signal u
ijk =
gi(I 
i )sj
wij
uijk
, which is accumulated in each neuron i. The
function gi(I 
i ) = ±e−i|I 
i| (where i > 0 is a sharpness
parameter) is a neuron-speciﬁc, input-dependent plasticity
gate that determines the sign and amplitude of induced
plasticity (Fig. 2B).
2. Plasticity expression: After the replay cycle, the accumulated
plasticity signal is expressed by updating each component
uijk with the increment Δuijk = Gi
∑
 u
ijk, where Gi is a
neuron-speciﬁc learning rate that is regulated so that the total
amount of expression is the same in each cycle (Fig. 2 C).
The plasticity signal is also used to adjust the inhibitory input
Iinh,i.
3. Homeostatic scaling: All uijk are scaled by a normalization
factor, and the process starts over.
This consolidation model possesses a number of noteworthy
mathematical properties: First, it is self-supervised, and requires
no explicit error or target signal, as the target is provided by the re-
sponse of the neurons themselves. Second, it maximizes the SNR
for noise of typeq = 2/z (Figs. 1D and 2D). In other words, our
consolidation model withz-component weights leads to the same
solution as conventional single-component weights optimized
with L2/z regularization (SI Appendix, Consolidation Algorithm).
Our model, however, ﬁnds the solution with multiplicative
homeostatic scaling, whereas a conventional implementation
of L2/z would require inhomogeneous homeostatic changes
(SI Appendix , Geometric Interpretation ). As a result, networks
that undergo consolidation with more subsynaptic components
(higher z) end up with a larger fraction of zero-valued weights,
also referred to as pruned weights (Fig. 2 E and F and SI
Appendix, Fig. S1). Crucially, only networks with more than one
component (z≥ 2) reach a connection probability low enough
to be comparable to that in cortex, while the lowest connectivity
produced using single-component weights is 50% (Fig. 2 E; see
also SI Appendix, Theoretical Solutions). Finally, the consolidation
process also ensures that components within the same synapse
align with each other, so that uij1 = uij2 = . . . = uijz (Fig. 2F).
This means that all components end up highly correlated with
the total connection strength wij, consistent with experimental
ﬁndings (48, 49).
Networks with two-factor synapses ( z = 2) constitute a
particularly important case. While consolidation with z = 1
maximizes memory robustness with respect to neural noise (Fig. 2
G and H), consolidation with z = 2 maximizes robustness with
respect to synaptic noise (Fig. 2 I and J). In practice, this means
that two-factor consolidation generates networks that are highly
pruned yet, at the same time, at least as robust to synaptic noise
as the densest networks (Fig. 2 J). For z = 2, the dynamics
of the weights close to convergence can be described with the
differential equation
dwij
dt ∝
[
h
(∑
j wij
)
  
homeostatic scaling
+ Gi(t)∑
 gi
(
I 
i
)

j
  
replay-induced LTP/LTD
]
· wij, [4]
where h(x) is a general homeostatic function that is negative
when x exceeds a baseline, and positive otherwise. Importantly,
all weight changes are now multiplicative, i.e., proportional to the
momentary value of wij. The homeostatic part, more speciﬁcally,
performs a multiplicative L1-regularization that both prunes a
large fraction of the connections and scales the remaining ones to
maintain a constant average strength. This, by extension, keeps
the average input current constant as well (assuming a stable
level of output activity in the network). The formulation in
Eq. 4 is directly compatible with, and generalizes, previously
proposed models of homeostatic plasticity (35, 36) (SI Appendix,
The Homeostatic Function).
Note that our consolidation model is entirely derived from
normative assumptions. This is equally true for the synapse model
in Eq. 2, which originates from a parameterization technique that
implicitly biases an optimizer to ﬁnd sparse solutions (50, 51).
Ablating either the subsynaptic structure or the homeostatic
scaling causes the model to fail (SI Appendix, Fig. S4).
Consolidation Signs in Synaptic, Neural, and Behavioral Data.
In order to demonstrate how the consolidation algorithm can
be incorporated into a single, self-supervised model of memory
formation and stabilization, we simulate a network with two-
factor synapses that optimally stores patterns across two phases
of learning.
In the ﬁrst phase, representing wakefulness, the network starts
fully connected and sequentially encounters external stimulus
patterns that are imprinted as attractors using few-shot learning
(SI Appendix, Simulating Wakefulness and Sleep ). This leaves the
network densely connected and sensitive to noise (Fig. 3A). In the
second phase, the network undergoes consolidation, rendering
the connectivity sparse and robust (Fig. 3 B; see SI Appendix ,
Fig. S5 for details). This process represents the cumulative effect
of multiple sleep sessions taking place over an extended period of
time.
The simulation qualitatively reproduces a wide range of
experimental observations linked to long-term plasticity (Fig. 3
C–I; note, however, that simulated effects generally are more
ampliﬁed, as we model a long stretch of biological time with
a single bout of optimal consolidation). On the synaptic level,
simulated wakefulness produces relatively small weight pertur-
bations, while sleep entails more extensive rewiring in which
a majority of existing weights are pruned. The distribution of
presleep weights therefore closely overlaps with the distribution of
pruned weights (Fig. 3C, Left), while surviving weights generally
are stronger. We ﬁnd analogous results in experimental data (52)
(Fig. 3 C, Right). The distribution of dendritic spine volume
for young spines (age ≤ 4 d) is statistically indistinguishable
from that of pruned spines, while old spines (age > 4 d) are
signiﬁcantly larger (Kolmogorov–Smirnov tests, Ppruned = 0.61,
Pold = 8.6× 10−190, nyoung = 2,268, npruned = 2,300,
nold = 5,011). Simulated networks with single-component
weights, however, do not undergo enough pruning to replicate
this effect (SI Appendix, Fig. S7A).
An analysis of individual weight trajectories reveals that the
probability of pruning decreases as a function of strength, mean-
ing that connections that are potentiated prior to consolidation
have higher chances of surviving (Fig. 3 D, Left). This trend
is, again, present and highly signiﬁcant in the experimental data
(52) (logistic regression with two-tailedt-test, P = 1.5×10−195,
n = 7,311; Fig. 3 D, Right).
Next, we analyze how weights are conﬁgured depending on
neural response similarities. Using the total excitatory input
current∑
j wijsj as an indicator of graded output activity, we ﬁnd
that neurons are more likely to stay connected after consolidation
4 of 10 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2422602122 pnas.org
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by EPFL SISB BIBLIOTEQUE on November 7, 2025 from IP address 128.178.116.106.


===== PAGE 5 =====
0 1 2
SNRbefore (z-scored recall rate)
−0.6
0.0
0.6
1.2
SNRafter − SNRbefore
 (z-scored recall rate)
12h Sleep
r =− 0.17
P=5×10−4
n =439
12h Wake
r =− 0.21
P=7×10−6
n =437
***
Experimental data          F & H (2012)
F & H (2015)
A & C (2021)
0 0.1 0.2 0.3
SNRbefore (norm.)
0
1
2SNRafter − SNRbefore (norm.)
2 
6 
15 
105 cycles
Simulation
0 0.2 0.4 0.6
SNRbefore (norm.)
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5SNRafter − SNRbefore (norm.)
high load
low load
Prediction
101 102
Spine volume (a.u.)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
n.s. ***
Loewenstein et al. (2011)
young
pruned
old
10−1 100
Weight
0
1
2Probability density
Simulation
before
pruned
after
0 50 100 150 200
Time step
0
40
Ii (t) after consolidation
0 50 100 150 200
Time step
0
40
Ii (t) before consolidation
1 10 100
Stimulus rank
0
2
4
6Firing rate (z-score)
*****
Woloszyn & Sheinberg (2012)
1 10 100
Stimulus rank
0
2
4Input current (z-score)
Simulation
Familiar
Novel
Novel      Familiar     
0.2
0.4
0.6Sparseness (over stim.)
**
exc.
input
soft
output
hard
output
exp.
data
 
0.0 0.2 0.4
Response correlation
.05
.1
.5
Connection strength
 
Weight
EPSP
0.0 0.2 0.4
Response correlation
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Connection probability
P=2×10−7
 
Simulation
Cossell et al.
(2015)
−2 0 2
Log-normalized weight
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Pruning probability
100 500
10
5 c
yc
les
Simulation
min
max
0 40
Neuron j
0
40Neuron i
 wij
0 40
Neuron j
0
40Neuron i
wij
−3 0 3
Log-norm. spine vol.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Loewenstein et al. (2011)
Binning
Logit regr.
A
C
E
H I
F G
D
B
=0.45
P= 9×10−5
n =72
ρ
Fig. 3. Signs of consolidation across three spatial scales. ( A) Weight matrix ( Left) and input current ( Right) of 40 neurons during pattern recall, before
consolidation (f = 0.05,  = 0.44). The network receives a cue every 10 steps and is then simulated for 10 steps. Synaptic noise starts after 50 steps (red line;
noise/⟨u⟩obs = 0.3). ( B) Same as ( A), but after consolidation. ( C) Distribution of weights ( Left) and dendritic spine sizes on pyramidal cells in rodent cortex
(52) (Right). (D) Pruning probability as a function of weight in simulated data ( Left) and as a function of spine size in experimental data ( Right). (E) Connection
probability (Left) and connection strength (Right) as a function of binned response correlation among simulated neurons (black) and pyramidal cells in rodent
visual cortex (53) (blue; error bars represent mean ± SEM). Dashed curves are grand averages. Connection strengths are normalized to have a maximum of
one. (F) Tuning curves with respect to familiar and novel (previously unseen) stimuli, for simulated neurons ( Left; mean over 103 neurons) and for pyramidal
cells in macaque inferior temporal cortex (54) ( Right; mean± SEM). (G) Tuning sparseness in simulations (circles; mean over 103 neurons) and experimental
data (squares; mean± SEM). The hard and soft output is obtained by using sigmoidal activation functions with varying smoothness. (H) Left panel shows change
in pattern SNR after simulated consolidation (circles are patterns) while Right panel shows change in human memory trace SNR after sleep (pink markers) and
after wake (blue markers) (55–57). Behavioral data have been slightly jittered for clarity. (I) Change in pattern SNR after simulated consolidation with diﬀerent
loads. Stars indicate significance levels∗∗P < 0.01 and∗∗∗P < 0.001.
if their responses during recall are correlated (Fig. 3E, Left). Sim-
ilar synaptic selectivity is seen in experimental measurements of
visual cortical neurons in mice during static image presentations
(53) (two-sided Cochran–Armitage trend test, P = 1.7× 10−7,
n = 520). The average connection strength also increases with
response correlation, both in simulated and experimental data
(Spearman’s  = 0.45, P = 8.7× 10−5, n = 72; Fig. 3 E,
Right). Networks with single-factor synapses, however, fail to
match experimental statistics (SI Appendix, Fig. S7B).
Another direct consequence of our consolidation model is an
increased neural stimulus selectivity. Each neuron’s response to
the stored patterns is enhanced by moving the input current
further away from the threshold. This sharpens the tuning curve
for familiar (consolidated) patterns relative to novel ones (Fig. 3F,
Left; SI Appendix, Stimulus Tuning). The same phenomenon can
be observed in the activity of inferotemporal cortical pyramidal
cells of Macaques, measured during the presentation of familiar
and novel images (54) (Welch’st-test,∗∗P < 0.01,∗∗∗P = 1.5×
10−5, n = 73; Fig. 3F, Right). The sharpness of the tuning curve
is quantiﬁed by the sparseness, a metric that is near zero when all
stimulus responses are similar, and near one when responses are
selective to very few stimuli (SI Appendix, Stimulus Tuning). The
sparseness increases signiﬁcantly during stimulus familiarization
(Welch’s t-test, P = 2.9× 10−3, n = 73; Fig. 3G).
On the behavioral level, sleep has been shown to enhance the
ability to recall recently formed declarative memory (58), in a
way that suggests larger improvements for items with weaker
initial encoding (59). Our model demonstrates this effect when
the change in SNR for each pattern is evaluated over the course
of simulated consolidation (Fig. 3 H, Left). Patterns that start
off weak consistently beneﬁt more than those starting strong
(negative correlation), while a longer period of replay produces
PNAS 2025 Vol. 122 No. 44 e2422602122 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2422602122 5 of 10
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by EPFL SISB BIBLIOTEQUE on November 7, 2025 from IP address 128.178.116.106.


===== PAGE 6 =====
0.1 0.5 0.9
Storage load
(age)
0.0
0.4
0.8Sparseness
z =2
Control
Simulation
29-3044-45 83-92129-151
Age (postnatal days)
0.4
0.6
0.8Sparseness
ρ = − 0.7
P< . 005
Berkes et al. (2009)
Low High
Storage load
(env. richness)
0.0
0.5
1.0Connection density
Control
model
Our
model
z =1
z=2
Simulation
Low High
Env. richness
.01
.02
.03
.04Spine density (μm−1)
**
*
Jung & Herms (2014)
L2/3 basal
L5 apical
A
B
Fig. 4. Signs of consolidation across development. ( A) Left: Connection
density as a function of storage load (indirect indicator of environmental
richness) after consolidation with our model ( z = 1, 2; same as Fig. 2)
and with a control model that maximizes storage load instead of SNR ( SI
Appendix, Control Model ). Right: Density of stable dendritic spines (age > 3
wk) in somatosensory cortex of rodents kept in environments of low and
high stimulus richness since infancy (60). Stars indicate significance levels
∗P < 0.05 and∗∗P < 0.01. ( B) Left: Sparseness across stimuli (red, black)
and across neurons (pink, gray; SI Appendix , Stimulus Tuning ) as a function
of storage load (indirect indicator of age) after consolidating low-activity
patterns ( f = 0.05) with our model ( z = 2) and the control model. Right:
Sparseness across time (red) and across neurons (pink) for neurons in visual
cortex of ferrets at diﬀerent stages of development (61). Circles represent
mean over 103 simulated neurons while squares represent experimental
data (mean± SEM).
a stronger average encoding (curve shifts upward). The slope
is caused by a ceiling effect: As the SNR of each pattern is
pushed to a maximum, weak patterns inevitably exhibit a larger
improvement than strong ones.
For a qualitative comparison with experimental evidence, we
pool and reanalyze three large, published datasets on sleep-based
consolidation of declarative memory (55–57). In each study,
humans memorize 40 word pairs and recall is tested before and
after 12 h of wakefulness or sleep. We estimate the memory SNR
in each subject as the z-scored recall rate, and then compute the
change between the two test sessions. The result (Fig. 3H, Right)
conﬁrms that gains in SNR are higher for subjects with weaker
initial encoding, both after wakefulness (Pearson’s r =−0.21,
P = 6.7× 10−6, n = 437) and sleep ( r =−0.17, P = 4.6×
10−4, n = 439). There is no signiﬁcant difference in the slopes
(t-test, P = 0.49, n = 876), but sleep-gains are systematically
higher across all initial performance levels (t-test, P = 3.9×10−4,
n = 876). Our model suggests a conceptual explanation to these
ﬁndings, where the slope is caused by a ceiling in memory strength
while the vertical shift results from a difference in consolidation
duration or efﬁcacy between sleep and wake. The model predicts
that a similar systematic shift also should be observed when
changing the length of the word list (Fig. 3I).
Implications for Lifelong Learning. To model the effects of
consolidation over developmental timescales (typically months or
years), we start from the assumption that memory load increases
with age as a response to lifelong learning (see also refs. 14 and 15).
Accordingly, we liken cortical circuits at different stages in life
to networks that have consolidated varying amounts of memory.
We also use this model to represent cortical development under
conditions of low or high environmental richness.
According to our model, circuits that optimally store larger
number of memories require a higher density of connections
(Fig. 4 A, Left). This is a direct consequence of maximizing
SNR under sparseness constraints (see Fig. 2 E, z≥ 2). This
is consistent with the elevation in dendritic spine density
that has been observed in animals raised in stimulus-enriched
environments (60) (Student’s t-test, P = 5.7× 10−3, nlow = 5,
nhigh = 6 for layer 5; P = 0.035, nlow = 4, nhigh = 4 for
layer 2/3; Fig. 4 A, Right). The experimental ﬁnding cannot
be reproduced if we alter the consolidation model to maximize
storage capacity instead of SNR, as has been suggested in past
theoretical work (14–16, 62) (Fig. 4A, black;SI Appendix, Control
Model). The effect is also occluded when using single-factor
synapses (Fig. 4A, gray).
Networks that optimally store more memories also exhibit
ﬂatter tuning proﬁles and, thus, decreased sparseness (Fig. 4
B, Left). This is a fundamental property of our consolidation
algorithm, caused by the decrease in the maximum attainable
SNR with load (Fig. 2 H and J). The effect is analogous
to the decline in sparseness that has been measured in visual
cortical neurons of ferrets at different stages of development,
from eye-opening to adulthood (61) (Spearman’s  =−0.69,
P = 2.9× 10−3, n = 16 for sparseness across time; =−0.67,
P = 4.5× 10−3, n = 16 for sparseness across neurons; Fig. 4
B, Right). This trend cannot be reproduced with a network that
maximizes storage capacity instead of SNR (Fig. 4B, black).
Scaling of Intrinsic Synaptic Noise. Our consolidation model
crucially relies on the parameterization of each synaptic weight
wij as a product of multiple components uijk. Is it possible to
detect signatures of such synaptic ultrastructure in available
experimental data? To answer this, we ﬁrst note that a key
prediction of our model can be found in the synaptic noise
scaling. When the volatile componentuij1 is subjected to random
perturbations, the weight of the synapse, as a whole, ﬂuctuates
with an amplitude Δw∝ w1−1/z. For two-factor synapses, this
reduces to
Δw∝√w . [5]
Stated more generally, our model predicts that synapses with
more than one component display intrinsic noise that scales
sublinearly with weight, both for potentiation and depression.
Sublinear scaling also holds true when all componentsuijk are sub-
ject to noise perturbations (SI Appendix, Extended Synaptic Noise
Analysis). It is only in the limit of inﬁnitely many components
(z→∞ ) that the noise magnitude becomes proportional to
the weight. Conversely, only single-component synapses produce
noise that is additive and uncorrelated to weight.
To validate this prediction with an artiﬁcial synaptic dataset,
we model the internal structure of a synapse as a stochastic
dynamical system, and use this to simulate the evolution of 1,000
independent synapses through time ( SI Appendix , Simulating
Synaptic Intrinsic Noise ).
The data are analyzed by plotting the absolute weight change
|Δw(t)| =|w(t + Δt)− w(t)| as a function of the initial weight
w(t) and then applying a moving average to detect underlying
trends in the scattered data (Fig. 5A; see SI Appendix, Fig. S8A for
more examples). Consistent with our theory, the average noise
amplitude⟨|Δw|⟩ increases linearly in a log–log plot, both for
6 of 10 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2422602122 pnas.org
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by EPFL SISB BIBLIOTEQUE on November 7, 2025 from IP address 128.178.116.106.


===== PAGE 7 =====
A
B
C
Fig. 5. Scaling of synaptic fluctuations. ( A) Absolute weight change as a function of initial weight in simulated data with z = 2, for potentiation (orange) and
depression (blue); see also SI Appendix, Figs. S8A and S9A. Solid lines are the results of moving averages, and dashed lines are linear fits to the solid lines (slope
value shown in Upper Left corner). The identity line (gray) has slope 1 and is included for comparison. (B) The same type of plot as in (A) but for experimentally
measured dendritic spine sizes in rodent cortical neurons (63, 64) (SI Appendix, Figs. S8B and S9B). (C) The scaling exponent of synaptic fluctuations in simulated
(circles) and experimental data (squares; mean± SE). This is the slope of the average fluctuation size in logarithmic space, obtained with bootstrapped linear
regression (see SI Appendix , Fig. S10 for additional regression results). Labels on the abscissa contain a publication reference and a brief methodological
descriptor; complete details are provided in SI Appendix, Tables S5–S7.
depression (Δw < 0) and potentiation (Δw > 0). This indicates
a power-law relation in the original data, i.e.⟨|Δw|⟩∝ wx, where
the exponent x is equivalent to the slope of the line in logarithmic
space. We estimate this slope by applying bootstrapped linear
regression to the trend line (SI Appendix, Synaptic Noise Scaling )
and ﬁnd that it agrees with theoretical predictions (Fig. 5 C).
Applying linear regression to the root mean square deviation
or directly on the raw data yields virtually the same results ( SI
Appendix, Figs. S9A and S10).
To test our prediction on experimental data, we compile 20
published synaptic datasets from 9 separate studies (29, 52, 63–
69). These publications span more than a decade of research and
employ ﬂuorescence microscopy and superresolution nanoscopy
in both cultured neurons and live animals, under various
environmental conditions (see SI Appendix , Tables S5–S7 for
details). Common to all studies, however, is that they measure
an indirect indicator of synaptic strength (denoted ˆw) in a large
population of synapses that have been individually tracked over
extended periods of time (ranging from 24 h to almost 30 d).
We reanalyze each dataset according to the procedure de-
scribed above. In the two largest datasets, shown as examples
in Fig. 5 B, the average noise magnitude exhibits a clear linear
dependence on the synaptic strength in logarithmic space, again
indicating an underlying power-law like that found in simulations
(similar results are reported in refs. 67 and 70; see SI Appendix,
Figs. S8 B and S9 B for more examples). The estimated noise
scaling exponent for each dataset is presented in Fig. 5 C and SI
Appendix, Fig. S10.
For large datasets with high sampling frequencies (i.e., short
sampling intervals Δt ≤ 1h; Fig. 5 C, ﬁrst group of data),
synaptic ﬂuctuations consistently have a sublinear scaling, with
an exponent of 0.56± 0.02 for potentiation and 0.69± 0.02 for
depression (99% weighted CI). These estimates are remarkably
reliable and close to the range predicted by our synaptic noise
model with z = 2 and 3. Note, however, that our model only
describes intrinsic noise, which is best measured in conditions
when activity-dependent synaptic plasticity is either negligible
or entirely blocked. Theoretical predictions are therefore only
PNAS 2025 Vol. 122 No. 44 e2422602122 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2422602122 7 of 10
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by EPFL SISB BIBLIOTEQUE on November 7, 2025 from IP address 128.178.116.106.


===== PAGE 8 =====
approximately applicable to the experiments, which, in almost
all cases, contain extrinsic synaptic noise. The data by Hazan
and Ziv (64) is a notable exception, as this was acquired while
glutamatergic transmission was pharmacologically blocked. In
this case, the noise scaling almost exactly matches the theoretical
lines for z = 2 and 3, as we obtain 0.51± 0.01 for potentiation
and 0.64± 0.01 for depression (mean± SE, bootstrap of 100
samples; Fig. 5 B, Left).
In datasets with smaller sample sizes (Fig. 5 C, second group)
and longer sampling intervals (Fig. 5C, third group), the scaling
exponent generally increases for depression and decreases for
potentiation (Fig. 5 C, second and third CIs; SI Appendix ,
Extended Synaptic Noise Analysis ).
Signs of Homeostatic Scaling in Synaptic Noise. Our plasticity
model does not only govern the trajectory of individual synapses,
but it also shapes the distribution of synaptic populations. Recall
that our model includes homeostatic scaling that, close to optimal
storage, maintains a constant synaptic “mass” ∑w2/z. The
implication is that the weight distribution, in the absence of
activity-dependent plasticity, exhibits a constant 2
z -th moment.
To conﬁrm this numerically, we return to the simulated synaptic
data and estimate the stability of different moments of the weight
distribution by calculating the coefﬁcient of variation (CV) of the
norm (∑wq)1/q across time (Fig. 6 A and B). Consistent with
theory, we ﬁnd that the weight norm that varies least over time
(i.e., has lowest CV rank) roughly follows the relationqmin = 2/z
(Fig. 6 C and D).
We test this prediction using the experimental data by
Kaufman et al. (63), composed of 1 ,087 dendritic spines
measured every 30 min over a total of 24 h. At each measurement,
we calculate the norm of spine sizes, followed by the CV of
the norm across time. The result, plotted as a function of q,
A
C D
B
Fig. 6. Signs of homeostatic scaling in synaptic noise. ( A) Diagram of
dendritic spines observed at three time points t1, t2, and t3. The spine sizes
(denoted with vector w) fluctuate as some spines grow (black) and others
shrink (light gray). ( B) The norm of spine sizes ( ∥w∥q) is calculated at each
time point (column) using diﬀerentq-values (rows). The fluctuation of a norm
is then quantified by the CV over all time points. (C) The CV of norms, ranked
from zero to one, as a function of q, using simulated data (black, gray) and
dendritic spine sizes (pink) from pyramidal cells in rodent cortex (63) (mean±
SE, bootstrap of 1,000 samples; see alsoSI Appendix, Fig. S12). (D) The q-value
at which the CV is minimized (denoted qmin).
displays a U-shaped curve that is best matched by the two-
factor model ( R2 = 0.67 for z = 2, compared to second best
R2 = 0.64 for z = 3; Fig. 6C, pink curve). The CV is lowest at
qmin = 1.09± 0.43, close to the theoretical prediction forz = 2
(Fig. 6D, pink line; see also SI Appendix , Fig. S12). The same
analysis of Hazan and Ziv’s data (64) yields noisier results, but the
z = 2 model is, again, the closest match (SI Appendix, Fig. S13).
Discussion
We have derived a general mathematical model of synaptic
consolidation that optimizes for noise-robust recall of attractor
memories in recurrent neural networks with factorized multi-
component synapses. The contribution of our work is two-fold:
First, it demonstrates that the various mechanisms underlying
consolidation can be derived from ﬁrst principles, within a single
model of optimal memory storage. Second, by linking optimality
to synaptic plasticity and the concept of critical capacity, it
offers an explanation of how the structured connectivity of
optimal attractor networks (14–16) might emerge in cortical
circuits.
In the special case of two-factor synapses, our plasticity model
has a particularly simple form, in which all updates are multi-
plicative, both in terms of subsynaptic factors u and the whole
synaptic weight w. Despite this, a large fraction of connections
are pruned while the average strength of surviving synapses is
homeostatically regulated. This resolves a contradiction in past
synaptic plasticity studies: Sparse connectivity, like that measured
in neocortex (6), has been difﬁcult to reconcile with multiplicative
homeostatic scaling (31), given that Hebbian plasticity with
multiplicative constraints tends to produce dense solutions (71).
Sparse solutions for single-component weights typically require
constraints that are either additive (16, 34, 71, 72) or that impose
hard thresholds (34). This generally requires hyperparameter-
tuning prior to learning (SI Appendix, Geometric Interpretation).
The introduction of multicomponent synapses, however, recon-
ciles the need for sparsiﬁcation with multiplicative homeostatic
plasticity. Two-factor synapses, in particular, also maximize the
ability of a network to recall patterns under intrinsic synaptic
noise while exhibiting noise scaling characteristics that match
experimental data better than the conventional unitary synapse
model. These ﬁndings are compatible with the wider neuroscien-
tiﬁc literature, where average synaptic strength often is computed
as a product of two or three factors, such as the vesicle release
probability, number of release sites, and the quantized vesicle
size (49).
Our results suggest that synaptic structural complexity serves
a computational and metabolic purpose by implicitly biasing
connectivity to be sparse, thereby lowering energy consumption
and freeing unneeded synaptic resources for future learning. As
such, our work is complementary to recent studies analyzing the
effects of the synaptic ultrastructure on memory stability (73, 74),
consolidation (43, 75), and energy consumption (76) (see also
ref. 44).
We interpret our consolidation model as a general theory of
sleep by situating it in the following scenario: During wakeful-
ness, the network undergoes intense sensory-driven stimulation
which imprints neural activity patterns as attractors. These are
initially labile and, thus, represent immature engrams that are
difﬁcult to recall and are easily erased by spurious plasticity.
During sleep, external inputs are silenced and patterns can
be replayed. The process of consolidation now serves to tune
connectivity in a way that enlarges all basins of attraction and
8 of 10 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2422602122 pnas.org
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by EPFL SISB BIBLIOTEQUE on November 7, 2025 from IP address 128.178.116.106.


===== PAGE 9 =====
pushes the network to critical capacity. This stabilizes the engrams
and makes them resilient to structural and sensory perturbations.
Our model relies on a self-supervised replay mechanism that
ﬁrst reinstates memories sequentially, and thereafter modiﬁes the
synapses. This implies that memories must be recallable prior to
sleep and that replay must be signiﬁcantly faster than plasticity
expression. Both requirements are supported by experimental
observations (59, 77).
Our account of sleep-based consolidation offers an alternative
to an earlier theory of sleep (78, 79), where replay is used to
unlearn spurious attractors with anti-Hebbian plasticity in order
to indirectly increase the robustness of desired memories. By
contrast, our model is Hebbian and accomplishes the same goal
by replaying only information that already is familiar, without
having to identify spurious patterns.
The plasticity rule that forms the core of our consolidation
model can be tested in synaptic, neural, and behavioral data.
On the synaptic level, the model predicts that the internal
structure of a synapse manifests itself as a sublinear scaling
of intrinsic noise ﬂuctuations. For two-factor synapses, this
speciﬁcally means that noise scales as O(√w). We emphasize,
however, that an accurate analysis of synaptic noise requires
a high sampling frequency and silencing of neural activity.
Estimates of noise scaling are uninformative if the time between
measurements is too long, as this only provides a temporal
average that obscures the dynamics of instantaneous ﬂuctuations,
which are nonlinear and state-dependent. Similarly, the analysis
of homeostatic scaling effects in synaptic norms should ideally
be performed on measurements from synapses that are affected
by the same homeostatic mechanism and are under blocked
signaling.
On the neural level, our plasticity model requires a gating
function that predicts that patterns linked to novel, immature,
or otherwise weak memories induce higher levels of plasticity,
compared to patterns representing highly familiar memories.
Finally, on the behavioral level, we predict that memories
that are weakly encoded prior to sleep generally display a larger
improvement in SNR (and in the rate of recall) after sleep. While
we partly conﬁrm this with three large, published datasets, these
cover only a part of the range of initial encoding. Moreover,
our model predicts that the average recall performance should
shift downward when subjects are required to memorize more
information, and vice versa.
We anticipate that our normative account of synaptic consol-
idation will contribute to a better understanding of long-term
memory by inspiring neurobiologists to test the model in future
experiments.
Materials and Methods
We consider N binary neurons indexed i = 1, . . ., N with output si∈{ 0, 1}
and update dynamics si(t + 1) = Θ(∑N
j=1 wijsj(t)− Iinh,i), where Θ is the
Heaviside function,wij≥ 0 are synaptic strengths, andIinh,i is a neuron-speciﬁc
inhibitory input current. During wakefulness,M activity patterns
i ∈{ 0, 1} are
stored such that
i = Θ(∑N
j=1 wij
j−Iinh,i) holds for all = 1, . . ., M. For
sufﬁciently small load M/N, this can be achieved with a simple autoassociative
“Hopﬁeld-like” rule (10) with nonnegative weights ( SI Appendix , Simulating
Wakefulness and Sleep). Although all patterns are stable ﬁxed points, they are
not particularly noise robust, in the sense that small perturbations of the weights
or neural activities may prevent recovery of the stored patterns. We assume that
the goal of consolidation is to make the attractors more noise robust.
Naive robustiﬁcation can be achieved by maximizing the margin
min (2
i−1)(wi·−Iinh,i)
∥wi∥2
, i.e. the L2-distance between the threshold and
the closest pattern (support vector), where we use vector notation wi =
(wi1, . . ., wiN),  = ( 
i , . . . , 
N ), and∥wi∥2 =
√∑
j w2
ij is the L2-
norm. This is equivalent to maximizing SNR (q = 2)∝ min|wi·−Iinh,i|
∥wi∥2
, i.e.
the signal-to-noise ratio of the weakest pattern. The batch-perceptron algorithm
(80) can be used to solve this optimization problem iteratively, by determining
in each iteration the support vector, incrementally changing the weights to
make it more robust, and rescaling the weights to maintain constant L2 weight
norm. The method has, however, two features that are difﬁcult to defend from a
biological perspective: i) the resulting connectivity is dense, and ii) the weakest
pattern needs to be tagged in each iteration.
The ﬁrst issue can be addressed by modifying the batch-perceptron algorithm
to maximize the L1-margin, i.e. maximize SNR (q = 1). Naive weight
regularization to maintain constant L1-norm, however, results in a homeostatic
process that is incompatible with multiplicative scaling (SI Appendix, Geometric
Interpretation). Based on insights from the optimization literature (50), we repa-
rameterize each weight as a product of two factors, i.e.wij = uij1uij2, and apply
the standard batch-perceptron algorithm to the individual factors. This enables
the maximization of SNR(q = 1) with multiplicative homeostatic scaling.
The second issue is addressed by approximating the artiﬁcial tagging of the
weakest pattern in each iteration of the batch-perceptron algorithm with an
online version. This is achieved with the gating functiongi and the learning rate
Gi. When combined, these act as a soft argmin function since Gi· gi(I
i )∝
exp(−i|I
i∥)∑
 exp(−i|I
i|) , whereI
i = wi·−Iinh,i (SI Appendix,The Gating Function).
Although our consolidation model is presented as a method for robustly
storing attractors in recurrent neural networks, all learning procedures and
reasoning steps generalize to feedforward architectures. In this case, any binary
input–output relationy
i = Θ(∑N
j=1 wij
j − Iinh,i) that is initially stored
with low noise tolerance can, through the same weight consolidation, be made
more robust. In SI Appendix, Fig. S6, we show an example where a sequence of
patterns is learned in this way.
Data, Materials, and Software Availability. Code data have been deposited
in GitHub (https://github.com/geoiat/2f-syn-con). All other data are included in
the manuscript and/or SI Appendix. Previously published data were used for
this work (16, 29, 52–57, 60, 61, 63–69).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We would like to thank Profs. Haruo Kasai, Noam
Ziv, David Sheinberg, József Fiser, Maria Florencia Iacaruso, Kimberly Fenn,
Armen Stepanyants, and Dr. Rohan Gala for sharing their experimental data.
This study was supported by the Swiss NSF with grants 200020_184615
and 200021_236436 (W.G. and J.B.), and by funding to the Blue Brain
Project, a research center of the École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne,
from the Swiss government’s ETH Board of the Swiss Federal Institutes of
Technology (G.I.).
1. P. W. Frankland, B. Bontempi, The organization of recent and remote memories. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
6, 119–130 (2005).
2. A. L. Wheeler et al., Identiﬁcation of a functional connectome for long-term fear memory in mice.
PLoS Comput. Biol. 9, e1002853 (2013).
3. S. Tonegawa, M. D. Morrissey, T. Kitamura, The role of engram cells in the systems consolidation of
memory. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 19, 485–498 (2018).
4. D. S. Roy et al., Brain-wide mapping reveals that engrams for a single memory are distributed
across multiple brain regions. Nat. Commun. 13, 1799 (2022).
5. N. Kalisman, G. Silberberg, H. Markram, The neocortical microcircuit as a tabula rasa. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102, 880–885 (2005).
6. A. Thomson, C. Lamy, Functional maps of neocortical local circuitry. Front. Neurosci. 1, 19–42
(2007).
7. R. Perin, T. K. Berger, H. Markram, A synaptic organizing principle for cortical neuronal groups.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 108, 5419–5424 (2011).
8. M. Khona, I. R. Fiete, Attractor and integrator networks in the brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 23,
744–766 (2022).
PNAS 2025 Vol. 122 No. 44 e2422602122 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2422602122 9 of 10
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by EPFL SISB BIBLIOTEQUE on November 7, 2025 from IP address 128.178.116.106.


===== PAGE 10 =====
9. W. A. Little, The existence of persistent states in the brain. Math. Biosci. 19, 101–120 (1974).
10. J. J. Hopﬁeld, Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collective computational
abilities. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 79, 2554–2558 (1982).
11. E. Gardner, The space of interactions in neural network models. J. Phys. A Math. Gen. 21, 257–270
(1988).
12. H. M. Köhler, D. Widmaier, Sign-constrained linear learning and diluting in neural networks.
J. Phys. A Math. Gen. 24, L495–L502 (1991).
13. N. Brunel, V. Hakim, P. Isope, J. P. Nadal, B. Barbour, Optimal information storage and the
distribution of synaptic weights: Perceptron versus Purkinje cell. Neuron 43, 745–757 (2004).
14. J. Chapeton, T. Fares, D. LaSota, A. Stepanyants, Efﬁcient associative memory storage in cortical
circuits of inhibitory and excitatory neurons. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109, E3614–E3622 (2012).
15. N. Brunel, Is cortical connectivity optimized for storing information? Nat. Neurosci. 19, 749–755
(2016).
16. D. Zhang, C. Zhang, A. Stepanyants, Robust associative learning is sufﬁcient to explain the structural
and dynamical properties of local cortical circuits. J. Neurosci. 39, 6888–6904 (2019).
17. B. Rasch, J. Born, About sleep’s role in memory. Physiol. Rev. 93, 681–766 (2013).
18. E. Lesburguères et al., Early tagging of cortical networks is required for the formation of enduring
associative memory. Science 331, 924–928 (2011).
19. T. Kitamura et al., Engrams and circuits crucial for systems consolidation of a memory. Science 356,
73–78 (2017).
20. T. Xu et al., Rapid formation and selective stabilization of synapses for enduring motor memories.
Nature 462, 915–919 (2009).
21. S. X. Chen, A. N. Kim, A. J. Peters, T. Komiyama, Subtype-speciﬁc plasticity of inhibitory circuits in
motor cortex during motor learning. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 1109–1115 (2015).
22. D. Ji, M. A. Wilson, Coordinated memory replay in the visual cortex and hippocampus during sleep.
Nat. Neurosci. 10, 100–107 (2007).
23. L. Deuker et al., Memory consolidation by replay of stimulus-speciﬁc neural activity. J. Neurosci. 33,
19373–19383 (2013).
24. B. C. Clawson et al., Causal role for sleep-dependent reactivation of learning-activated sensory
ensembles for fear memory consolidation. Nat. Commun. 12, 1200 (2021).
25. W. Li, L. Ma, G. Yang, W. B. Gan, REM sleep selectively prunes and maintains new synapses in
development and learning. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 427–437 (2017).
26. Y. Zhou et al., REM sleep promotes experience-dependent dendritic spine elimination in the mouse
cortex. Nat. Commun. 11, 4819 (2020).
27. V. V. Vyazovskiy, C. Cirelli, M. Pﬁster-Genskow, U. Faraguna, G. Tononi, Molecular and
electrophysiological evidence for net synaptic potentiation in wake and depression in sleep.
Nat. Neurosci. 11, 200–208 (2008).
28. L. de Vivo et al., Ultrastructural evidence for synaptic scaling across the wake/sleep cycle. Science
355, 507–510 (2017).
29. D. Miyamoto, W. Marshall, G. Tononi, C. Cirelli, Net decrease in spine-surface GluA1-containing
AMPA receptors after post-learning sleep in the adult mouse cortex. Nat. Commun. 12, 2881
(2021).
30. A. T. Pacheco, J. Bottorff, Y. Gao, G. G. Turrigiano, Sleep promotes downward ﬁring rate
homeostasis. Neuron 109, 1–15 (2020).
31. G. G. Turrigiano, K. R. Leslie, N. S. Desai, L. C. Rutherford, S. B. Nelson, Activity-dependent scaling of
quantal amplitude in neocortical neurons. Nature 391, 892–896 (1998).
32. S. Káli, P. Dayan, Off-line replay maintains declarative memories in a model of hippocampal-
neocortical interactions. Nat. Neurosci. 7, 286–294 (2004).
33. T. Tadros, G. P. Krishnan, R. Ramyaa, M. Bazhenov, Sleep-like unsupervised replay reduces
catastrophic forgetting in artiﬁcial neural networks. Nat. Commun. 13, 7742 (2022).
34. G. Chechik, I. Meilijson, E. Ruppin, Synaptic pruning in development: A computational account.
Neural Comput. 10, 1759–1777 (1998).
35. A. Renart, P. Song, X. J. Wang, Robust spatial working memory through homeostatic synaptic
scaling in heterogeneous cortical networks. Neuron 38, 473–485 (2003).
36. T. Toyoizumi, M. Kaneko, M. Stryker, K. Miller, Modeling the dynamic interaction of Hebbian and
homeostatic plasticity. Neuron 84, 497–510 (2014).
37. P. J. Sjöström, G. G. Turrigiano, S. B. Nelson, Multiple forms of long-term plasticity at unitary
neocortical layer 5 synapses. Neuropharmacology 52, 176–184 (2007).
38. A. Loebel, J. V. L. Bé, M. J. E. Richardson, H. Markram, A. V. M. Herz, Matched pre- and post-synaptic
changes underlie synaptic plasticity over long time scales. J. Neurosci. 33, 6257–6266 (2013).
39. J. Lisman, Glutamatergic synapses are structurally and biochemically complex because of multiple
plasticity processes: Long-term potentiation, long-term depression, short-term potentiation and
scaling. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B 372, 20160260 (2017).
40. R. Cossart, D. Aronov, R. Yuste, Attractor dynamics of network UP states in the neocortex. Nature
423, 283–288 (2003).
41. J. Nishiyama, R. Yasuda, Biochemical computation for spine structural plasticity. Neuron 87, 63–75
(2015).
42. M. Bosch et al., Structural and molecular remodeling of dendritic spine substructures during
long-term potentiation. Neuron 82, 444–459 (2014).
43. C. Clopath, L. Ziegler, E. Vasilaki, L. Büsing, W. Gerstner, Tag-trigger-consolidation: A model of early
and late long-term-potentiation and depression. PLoS Comput. Biol. 4, e1000248 (2008).
44. R. L. Redondo, R. G. M. Morris, Making memories last: The synaptic tagging and capture
hypothesis. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 12, 17–30 (2011).
45. R. Rubin, L. F. Abbott, H. Sompolinsky, Balanced excitation and inhibition are required for high-
capacity, noise-robust neuronal selectivity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 114, E9366–E9375 (2017).
46. G. Mongillo, S. Rumpel, Y. Loewenstein, Intrinsic volatility of synaptic connections - a challenge to
the synaptic trace theory of memory. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 46, 7–13 (2017).
47. N. E. Ziv, N. Brenner, Synaptic tenacity or lack thereof: Spontaneous remodeling of synapses. Trends
Neurosci. 41, 89–99 (2018).
48. J. I. Arellano, R. Benavides-Piccione, J. DeFelipe, R. Yuste, Ultrastructure of dendritic spines:
Correlation between synaptic and spine morphologies. Front. Neurosci. 1, 131–143 (2007).
49. S. Holler, G. Köstinger, K. A. C. Martin, G. F. P. Schuhknecht, K. J. Stratford, Structure and function
of a neocortical synapse. Nature 591, 111–116 (2021).
50. P. D. Hoff, Lasso, fractional norm and structured sparse estimation using a Hadamard product
parametrization. Comput. Stat. Data An. 115, 186–198 (2017).
51. E. Amid, M. K. Warmuth, “Winnowing with gradient descent” in Proceedings of the 33rd Conference
on Learning Theory, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, J. Abernethy, S. Agarwal, Eds.
(PMLR, 2020), vol. 125, pp. 163–182.
52. Y. Loewenstein, A. Kuras, S. Rumpel, Multiplicative dynamics underlie the emergence of the
log-normal distribution of spine sizes in the neocortex in vivo. J. Neurosci. 31, 9481–9488 (2011).
53. L. Cossell et al., Functional organization of excitatory synaptic strength in primary visual cortex.
Nature 518, 399–403 (2015).
54. L. Woloszyn, D. L. Sheinberg, Effects of long-term visual experience on responses of distinct classes
of single units in inferior temporal cortex. Neuron 74, 193–205 (2012).
55. K. M. Fenn, D. Z. Hambrick, Individual differences in working memory capacity predict sleep-
dependent memory consolidation. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 141, 404 (2012).
56. K. M. Fenn, D. Z. Hambrick, General intelligence predicts memory change across sleep. Psychon.
Bull. Rev. 22, 791–799 (2015).
57. J. E. Ashton, S. A. Cairney, Future-relevant memories are not selectively strengthened during sleep.
PLoS One 16, e0258110 (2021).
58. N. Dumay, Sleep not just protects memories against forgetting, it also makes them more accessible.
Cortex 74, 289–296 (2016).
59. D. Denis et al., The roles of item exposure and visualization success in the consolidation of
memories across wake and sleep. Learn. Mem. 27, 451–456 (2020).
60. C. K. E. Jung, J. Herms, Structural dynamics of dendritic spines are inﬂuenced by an environmental
enrichment: An in vivo imaging study. Cereb. Cortex 24, 377–384 (2014).
61. P. Berkes, B. White, J. Fiser, “No evidence for active sparsiﬁcation in the visual cortex” in Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 22, Y. Bengio, D. Schuurmans, J. Lafferty, C. Williams, A.
Culotta, Eds, (Curran Associates, Inc., 2009).
62. A. Alemi, C. Baldassi, N. Brunel, R. Zecchina, A three-threshold learning rule approaches the
maximal capacity of recurrent neural networks. PLoS Comput. Biol. 11, e1004439 (2015).
63. M. Kaufman, M. A. Corner, N. E. Ziv, Long-term relationships between cholinergic tone,
synchronous bursting and synaptic remodeling. PLoS One 7, e40980 (2012).
64. L. Hazan, N. E. Ziv, Activity dependent and independent determinants of synaptic size diversity.
J. Neurosci. 40, 2828–2848 (2020).
65. A. Fisher-Lavie, N. E. Ziv, Matching dynamics of presynaptic and postsynaptic scaffolds. J. Neurosci.
33, 13094–13100 (2013).
66. R. Gala et al., Computer assisted detection of axonal bouton structural plasticity in in vivo time-
lapse images. eLife 6, e29315 (2017).
67. K. Ishii et al., In vivo volume dynamics of dendritic spines in the neocortex of wild-type and Fmr1
KO mice. eNeuro 5, e0282–18 (2018).
68. H. Steffens et al., Stable but not rigid: Chronic in vivo STED nanoscopy reveals extensive
remodeling of spines, indicating multiple drivers of plasticity. Sci. Adv. 7, eabf2806 (2021).
69. W. Wegner, H. Steffens, C. Gregor, F. Wolf, K. I. Willig, Environmental enrichment enhances
patterning and remodeling of synaptic nanoarchitecture as revealed by STED nanoscopy. eLife 11,
e73603 (2022).
70. A. Morrison, A. Aertsen, M. Diesmann, Spike-timing-dependent plasticity in balanced random
networks. Neural Comput. 19, 1437–1467 (2007).
71. K. D. Miller, D. J. C. MacKay, The role of constraints in Hebbian learning. Neural Comput. 6,
100–126 (1994).
72. J. Sacramento, A. Wichert, M. C. W. van Rossum, Energy efﬁcient sparse connectivity from
imbalanced synaptic plasticity rules. PLoS Comput. Biol. 11, e1004265 (2015).
73. H. Z. Shouval, Clusters of interacting receptors can stabilize synaptic efﬁcacies. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 102, 14440–14445 (2005).
74. J. Triesch, A. D. Vo, A. S. Hafner, Competition for synaptic building blocks shapes synaptic plasticity.
eLife 7, e37836 (2018).
75. M. K. Benna, S. Fusi, Computational principles of synaptic memory consolidation. Nat. Neurosci.
19, 1697–1706 (2016).
76. H. L. Li, M. C. W. van Rossum, Energy efﬁcient synaptic plasticity. eLife 9, e50804 (2020).
77. D. R. Euston, M. Tatsuno, B. L. McNaughton, Fast-forward playback of recent memory sequences in
prefrontal cortex during sleep. Science 318, 1147–1150 (2007).
78. F. Crick, G. Mitchison, The function of dream sleep. Nature 304, 111–114 (1983).
79. J. J. Hopﬁeld, D. I. Feinstein, R. G. Palmer, ‘Unlearning’ has a stabilizing effect in collective
memories. Nature 304, 158–159 (1983).
80. W. Krauth, M. Mezard, Learning algorithms with optimal stability in neural networks. J. Phys. A
Math. Gen. 20, L745–L752 (1987).
10 of 10 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2422602122 pnas.org
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by EPFL SISB BIBLIOTEQUE on November 7, 2025 from IP address 128.178.116.106.
