

===== PAGE 1 =====
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  1 of 32
Selective consolidation of learning and 
memory via recall- gated plasticity
Jack W Lindsey*, Ashok Litwin- Kumar*
Zuckerman Mind Brain Behavior Institute, Columbia University, New York, United 
States
Abstract In a variety of species and behavioral contexts, learning and memory formation recruits 
two neural systems, with initial plasticity in one system being consolidated into the other over 
time. Moreover, consolidation is known to be selective; that is, some experiences are more likely 
to be consolidated into long- term memory than others. Here, we propose and analyze a model 
that captures common computational principles underlying such phenomena. The key component 
of this model is a mechanism by which a long- term learning and memory system prioritizes the 
storage of synaptic changes that are consistent with prior updates to the short- term system. This 
mechanism, which we refer to as recall- gated consolidation, has the effect of shielding long- term 
memory from spurious synaptic changes, enabling it to focus on reliable signals in the environment. 
We describe neural circuit implementations of this model for different types of learning problems, 
including supervised learning, reinforcement learning, and autoassociative memory storage. These 
implementations involve synaptic plasticity rules modulated by factors such as prediction accuracy, 
decision confidence, or familiarity. We then develop an analytical theory of the learning and memory 
performance of the model, in comparison to alternatives relying only on synapse- local consolidation 
mechanisms. We find that recall- gated consolidation provides significant advantages, substantially 
amplifying the signal- to- noise ratio with which memories can be stored in noisy environments. We 
show that recall- gated consolidation gives rise to a number of phenomena that are present in behav-
ioral learning paradigms, including spaced learning effects, task- dependent rates of consolidation, 
and differing neural representations in short- and long- term pathways.
eLife assessment
This fundamental work proposes a novel mechanism for memory consolidation where short- term 
memory provides a gating signal for memories to be consolidated into long- term storage. The work 
combines extensive analytical and numerical work applied to three different scenarios and provides 
a convincing analysis of the benefits of the proposed model, although some of the analyses are 
limited to the type of memory consolidation the authors consider (and don't consider), which limits 
the impact. The work will be of interest to neuroscientists and many other researchers interested in 
the mechanistic underpinnings of memory.
Introduction
Systems that learn and remember confront a tradeoff between memory acquisition and retention. 
Plasticity enables learning but can corrupt previously stored information. Consolidation mechanisms, 
which stabilize or render more resilient certain plasticity events associated with memory formation, are 
key to navigating this tradeoff (Kandel et al., 2014). Consolidation may be mediated both by molec-
ular dynamics at the synapse level (synaptic consolidation) and dynamics at the neural population level 
(systems consolidation).
ReSeaRCh aR tICLe
*For correspondence: 
jackwlindsey@gmail.com (JWL); 
a.litwin-kumar@columbia.edu 
(aL- K)
Competing interest: The authors 
declare that no competing 
interests exist.
Funding: See page 22
Preprint posted
06 July 2023
Sent for Review
14 July 2023
Reviewed preprint posted
24 November 2023
Reviewed preprint revised
02 July 2024
Version of Record published
18 July 2024
Reviewing Editor: Julijana 
Gjorgjieva, Technical University 
of Munich, Germany
 
  Copyright Lindsey and Litwin- 
Kumar. This article is distributed 
under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution License, 
which permits unrestricted use 
and redistribution provided that 
the original author and source 
are credited.


===== PAGE 2 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  2 of 32
In this work, we present a model and theoretical analysis of selective systems consolidation, with 
a focus on understanding the computational advantages it offers in terms of long- term learning and 
memory storage. Several prior theoretical studies have studied synaptic consolidation models from 
this perspective, providing descriptions of how synaptic consolidation affects the strength and lifetime 
of memories (Fusi et al., 2005; Lahiri and Ganguli, 2013; Benna and Fusi, 2016). In these studies, 
synapses are modeled with multiple internal variables, operating at distinct timescales, which enable 
individual synapses to exist in more labile or more rigid (‘consolidated’) states. Such models can 
prolong memory lifetime and recapitulate certain memory- related phenomena, notably power- law 
forgetting curves. Moreover, this line of work has established theoretical limits on the memory reten-
tion capabilities of any such synaptic model, and shown that biologically realistic models can approx-
imately achieve these limits (Lahiri and Ganguli, 2013; Benna and Fusi, 2016). These theoretical 
frameworks leave open the question of what computational benefit is provided by systems consolida-
tion mechanisms that take place in a coordinated fashion across populations of neurons.
The term systems consolidation most often refers to the process by which memories stored in the 
hippocampus are transferred to the neocortex (Figure 1A; Squire and Alvarez, 1995; Frankland and 
Bontempi, 2005; McClelland et al., 1995; McClelland and Goddard, 1996). Prior work has described 
the hippocampus and the neocortex as ‘complementary learning systems’, emphasizing their distinct 
roles: the hippocampus stores information about individual experiences, and the neocortex extracts 
structure from many experiences (McClelland et al., 1995; McClelland and Goddard, 1996). Related 
phenomena also occur in other brain systems. In rodents, distinct pathways underlie the initial acqui-
sition and long- term execution of some motor skills, with motor cortex apparently passing off respon-
sibility to basal ganglia structures as learning progresses (Kawai et al., 2015; Dhawale et al., 2021). 
A similar consolidation process is observed during vocal learning in songbirds, where song learning 
is dependent on the region LMAN but song execution can, after multiple days of practice, become 
LMAN- independent and rely instead on the song motor pathway (Figure 1B; Warren et al., 2011). 
Some insects also display a form of systems consolidation. Olfactory learning experiments in fruit flies 
reveal that short- term memory (STM) and long- term memory (LTM) retrieval recruit distinct neurons 
within the mushroom body, and the short- term pathway is necessary for LTM formation (Figure 1C; 
Cervantes- Sandoval et al., 2013; Dubnau and Chiang, 2013).
The examples above are all characterized by two essential features: the presence of two systems 
involved in learning similar information and an asymmetric relationship between them, such that 
learning in one system (the ‘LTM’) is facilitated by the other (the ‘STM’). Moreover, mounting evidence 
indicates that across all these systems, there exist mechanisms that selectively modulate or gate 
consolidation into long- term storage. In flies, for instance, recent work has shown that short- term 
olfactory memory recall gates LTM storage via a disinhibitory circuit, such that repeated stimulus- 
outcome pairings are consolidated into LTM but once- presented pairings are not (Awata et al., 2019). 
A recent study in songbirds indicates that the rate at which song learning is consolidated into the song 
motor pathway is modulated by performance quality (Tachibana et al., 2022). Finally, a large body of 
work has shown that propensity of hippocampal memories to be cortically consolidated is modulated 
RA
HVC
ɑ lobe
Neocortex
Short-term memory (STM)
Long-term memory (LTM)
LMAN
γ lobe
A B C
Hippocampus
Figure 1. Schematic of short- and long- term memory systems across species and brain areas. (A) In mice and other 
mammals, hippocampal memories are consolidated into neocortex. (B) Zebrafinch song learning initially depends 
on LMAN but later requires only HVC- to- RA synapses in the song motor pathway. (C) In the Drosophila mushroom 
body (inset), short- and long- term memories depend on dopamine- dependent plasticity in the γ and α lobes, 
respectively.


===== PAGE 3 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  3 of 32
by a variety of factors including repetition, reliability, and novelty (Terada et al., 2022; Gorriz et al., 
2023; Jackson et al., 2006; Brodt et al., 2016).
The ubiquity of the systems consolidation motif across species, neural circuits, and behaviors 
suggests that it offers broadly useful computational advantages that are complementary to those 
offered by synaptic mechanisms. In this work, we propose that the ability to selectively consolidate 
memories is the key computational feature that distinguishes systems from synaptic memory consoli-
dation. To formalize this idea, we generalize prior theoretical studies studies by considering environ-
ments in which some memories should be prioritized more than others for long- term retention. We 
then introduce a model of selective systems consolidation and show that it can provide substantial 
performance advantages in such environments. In the model, synaptic updates are consolidated into 
LTM depending on their consistency with knowledge already stored in STM. We term this mecha-
nism ‘recall- gated consolidation’. This model is well- suited to prioritize storage of reliable patterns of 
synaptic updates which are consistently reinforced over time. We derive neural circuit implementations 
of this model for several tasks of interest. These involve plasticity rules modulated by globally broad-
cast factors such as prediction accuracy, confidence, and familiarity. We develop an analytical theory 
that describes the limits on learning performance achievable by synaptic consolidation mechanisms 
and shows that recall- gated systems consolidation exhibits qualitatively different and complementary 
benefits. Our theory depends on a quantitative treatment of environmental statistics, in particular the 
statistics with which similar events recur over time. Different model parameter choices suit different 
environmental statistics, and give rise to different learning behavior, including spaced training effects. 
The model makes predictions about the dependence of consolidation rate on the consistency of 
features in an environment, and the amount of time spent in it. It also predicts that STM benefits from 
employing sparser representations compared to LTM. A variety of experimental data support predic-
tions of the model, which we review in the Discussion.
Results
Following prior work (Fusi et al., 2005; Benna and Fusi, 2016), we consider a network of neurons 
connected by an ensemble of N synapses whose weights are described by a vector  w ∈ RN  (our anal-
ysis also generalizes to synapses that store additional auxiliary information besides their weight; see 
Methods). For now, we are agnostic as to the structure of the network and its synaptic connections. 
The network’s synapses are subject to a stream of patterns of candidate synaptic potentiation and 
depression events. We refer to such a pattern as a memory, defined by a vector  
w∗ ∈ RN . Synaptic 
weights are updated by memories according to a plasticity rule (see Methods). The plasticity rule 
always updates  w  to be more aligned with the memory vector  w∗ ; thus, the memory may be inter -
preted as a ‘target’ value for the synaptic weights. One simple example of a synaptic update rule is 
a ‘binary switch’ model, in which synapses can exist in two states (active or inactive), and candidate 
synaptic updates are binary (potentiation or depression). In this model, inactive synapses activate 
(resp. active synapses inactivate) in response to potentiation (resp. depression) events with some 
probability p. However, our systems consolidation model can be used with any underlying synaptic 
mechanisms, and we will consider a variety of synaptic plasticity rules as underlying substrates.
In our framework, the same memory can be encountered repeatedly over time, and we will refer to 
such repeated encounters as ‘reinforcement’ of a memory (not to be confused with reward- contingent 
notions of reinforcement). We distinguish memories by the reliability, or frequency, with which they 
are reinforced. The notion of reliability in our framework is meant to capture the idea that the structure 
of events in the world which drive synaptic plasticity is in some cases consistent over time, and in other 
cases inconsistent. For now, we focus on a simple environment model which captures this essential 
distinction, in which there are two kinds of memories: ‘reliable’ and ‘unreliable’. Reliable memories 
are consistent patterns of synaptic updates that are reinforced regularly over time, whereas unreliable 
memories are spurious, randomly sampled patterns of synaptic updates. Concretely, in simulations, 
we assume that a given reliable memory is reinforced with independent probability λ at each timestep, 
and otherwise a randomly sampled unreliable memory is encountered.
A useful measure of system performance is the memory recall factor, defined as the overlap 
 
r = w · w∗  between a memory  w∗  and the current synaptic state  w . Specifically, we are interested in 
the signal- to- noise ratio (SNR) of the recall factor for reliable memories, (Fusi et al., 2005; Benna and 
Fusi, 2016), which normalizes the recall strength relative to the expected value of the fluctuations in 


===== PAGE 4 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  4 of 32
recall factors for random memory vectors  w∗
rand . We assume for simplicity that memories and weight 
vectors are mean- centered, so that the SNR may be written as follows:
 
SNR = w · w∗
√
Ew∗
rand
[(
w · w∗
rand
)2].
  
(1)
Recall-gated systems consolidation
In our model (Figure 2A), we propose that the population of N synapses is split into two subpop-
ulations which we call the ‘short- term memory’ (STM) and ‘long- term memory’ (LTM). Upon every 
presentation of a memory  w∗ , the STM recall  rSTM = wSTM · w∗
STM  is computed. Learning in the LTM 
is modulated by a factor  g(rSTM) . We refer to g as the ‘gating function’. For now we assume g to be 
a simple threshold function, equal to 0 for  rSTM < θ  and 1 for  rSTM ≥ θ 
, for some suitable threshold 
θ. This means that consolidation occurs only when a memory is reinforced at a time when it can be 
recalled sufficiently strongly by the STM. Later we will consider different choices of the gating func-
tion g, which may be more appropriate depending on the statistics of memory recurrence in the 
environment.
We refer to this mechanism as recall- gated consolidation. Its function is to filter out unreliable 
memories, preventing them from affecting LTM synaptic weights. With an appropriately chosen gating 
function, reliable memories will pass through the gate at a higher rate than unreliable memories. 
Consequently, events that trigger plasticity in the LTM will consist of a higher proportion of reliable 
memories (Figure 2B), and hence the LTM will attain a higher SNR than the STM. The cost of this 
CA STM
LTM (recall-gated consolidation)
STM+LTM (parallel)
w
w*
w
STML TM
No consolidation
Consolidation
B
w·w*< θ
w ·w* >θ
Time
STM LTM
Time steps
0
30
0 1000
Recall  SNR
w*
Reliable memory trace
Unreliable memory traces
Figure 2. Recall- gated systems consolidation model. (A) Schematic of systems consolidation model. Top and 
bottom rows illustrate different examples, in which a memory is not consolidated or consolidated, respectively. 
Memories  w∗  correspond to patterns of candidate potentiation and depression events (dashed arrows) applied 
to a synaptic population with weights w (solid arrows). The synaptic population is divided into an STM (left) and 
LTM (right). Memories that provoke strong recall in the STM – that is, overlap strongly with the present synaptic 
state – enable plasticity (consolidation) in the LTM; otherwise plasticity in the LTM is gated (gray shaded rectangle). 
Note that the synaptic weights and the components of the memory corresponding to the LTM need not be linked 
to those of the STM (i.e. the patterns of arrows are different between the left and right columns). (B) Schematic 
of the environmental statistics. A reliable memory (green) arrives repeatedly with probability λ at each time step, 
with randomly sampled ‘unreliable’ memories (gray) interspersed. The LTM is exposed to a filtered subset of 
consolidated memory traces with a higher proportion of reliable memories. (C) Simulation of recall performance of 
a single reliable memory with time as it is presented with probability  
λ = 0.25  at each time step, N=2000 synapses 
(1000 each in the STM and LTM). The STM and LTM learning rates (binary switching probabilities) are p=0.25 and 
p=0.05, respectively, and the synaptic state is initialized randomly, each synapse initially active with probability 
0.5. In the recall- gated model, the gating threshold is set at  
θ =2 −3 . Shaded regions indicate standard deviation 
across 1000 simulations.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 2:
Figure supplement 1. Same as Figure 2C, but with multiple reliable memories simultaneously learned, each 
recurring equally often at a rate  
λi = 0.01  for all reliable memories i.
Figure supplement 2. SNR as a function of repetitions for single populations without consolidation, varying the 
parameter k of the Weibull distribution governing interarrival times (and defining the learnable timescale in terms 
of the expected interarrival time).


===== PAGE 5 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  5 of 32
gating is to incur some false negatives—reliable memory presentations that fail to update the LTM. 
However, some false negatives can be tolerated given that we expect reliable memories to recur 
multiple times, and information about these events is still present in the STM. As a proof of concept of 
the efficacy of recall- gated consolidation, we conducted a simulation in which memories correspond 
to random binary patterns and plasticity follows a binary switch rule (Figure  2C). This simulation 
implements an ‘ideal observer’ model in which we assume the system has direct access to the memory 
vector and can compute the recall factor exactly (realistic implementations are discussed below). 
Notably, recall- dependent consolidation results in reliable memory recall with a much higher SNR than 
an alternative model in which LTM weight updates proceed independently of STM recall.
Neural circuit implementations of recall-gated consolidation
Our model requires a computation of recall strength, which we defined as the overlap between a 
memory and the current state of the synaptic population. From this definition, it is not clear how recall 
strength can be computed biologically. The mechanisms underlying computation of recall strength 
will depend on the task, network architecture, and learning rule giving rise to memory vectors. A 
simple example is the case of a population of input neurons connected to a single downstream output 
neuron, subject to a plasticity rule that potentiates synapses corresponding to active inputs. In this 
case, the recall strength quantity corresponds exactly to the total input received by the output neuron, 
which acts as a familiarity detector. Below, we give the corresponding recall factors for other learning 
and memory tasks: supervised learning, reinforcement learning, and unsupervised auto- associative 
memory, summarized in Figure 3A. The expressions for the recall factors are derived for each learning 
rule of interest in the Appendix. We emphasize that our use of the term ‘recall’ refers to the familiarity 
of synaptic update patterns (specifically, memory vectors), and does not necessarily correspond to 
familiarity of stimuli or other task variables. Thus, although we will continue to use the term ‘recall 
factor’, for a given task the recall factor quantity may have a different semantic interpretation, summa-
rized in Figure 3A. Note also that we use the term ‘learning rule’ to refer to how the memory vector 
is constructed from task quantities, while ‘plasticity rule’ is reserved for the mechanism by which 
memory vectors update synaptic weights.
Supervised learning
Suppose a population of neurons with activity x representing stimuli is connected via feedforward 
weights to a readout population with activity  
^y= Wx . The goal of the system is to predict ground- 
truth outputs  y 
. A simple choice of the form of the memory  
W∗  (written with a capital letter since 
the synaptic weights are being interpreted as a matrix) that will train the system is  W∗ = yxT
 , corre-
sponding to a associative Hebbian learning rule Hebb, 1949. The corresponding recall factor is  y · ^y 
, 
corresponding to prediction accuracy (Figure 3B; see Appendix for derivation).
Reinforcement learning
Suppose a population of neurons with activity x representing an animal’s state is connected to a popu-
lation with activity  π = Wx  which controls the action selection probabilities. Specifically, the log prob-
ability of selecting action a is proportional to πa (see Methods). Following action selection, the animal 
receives a reward, the value of which depends on the state and chosen action. A simple approach to 
reinforcement learning is to use a memory vector arising from a ‘three- factor’ rule (Joel et al., 2002; 
Frémaux and Gerstner, 2015; Lindsey et al., 2024)  W∗ = reward · axT , where  a  is a vector with 1 in 
the index corresponding to the selected action and 0 elsewhere. This learning rule reinforces actions 
that lead to reward. For this model, the corresponding recall factor is  reward · πa , a multiplicative 
combination of reward and the animal’s confidence in its selected action, as measured by its a priori 
log likelihood of selecting that action (see Appendix for derivation). Intuitively, the recall factor will be 
high when a confidently chosen action leads to reward (Figure 3C).
Unsupervised autoassociative memory
Suppose a population of neurons with activity  x  and recurrent weights  W  stores memories as attrac-
tors according to an autoassociative Hebbian rule, where memories correspond to  W∗ = xxT , similar 
to a Hopfield network Hopfield, 1982. In this case, the recall factor can be expressed as  x · (Wx) , a 
comparison between stimulus input  x  and recurrent input  Wx  (see Appendix for derivation). Intuitively, 


===== PAGE 6 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  6 of 32
Confidence
STM
LTM
Task Learning rule Recall factor
(W ·Δ W) Interpretation
Supervised ΔW = yxT y · ŷ Prediction accuracy
Reinforcement ΔW = r· axT r· p(a)C onfidence· reward
Unsupervised ΔW = xxT Σ(x · xi)2 Familiarity
Action
Familiari
ty
AND
Prediction
y
r
=
Time
50000
50000
5000
Time
Time
A
BC
DE
GF
AccuracyRewardDenoising
0.9
0.2
1
0.5
Figure 3. Circuit architectures for recall- gated consolidation model. (A) Description of learning rules 
corresponding to different types of learning problems and corresponding expressions for the recall factor used 
in the recall- gated consolidation model. (B) Schematic indicating a possible implementation of the model in a 
supervised learning problem, where LTM plasticity is modulated by the consistency between STM predictions 
and ground- truth labels. (C) Like B, but for a reinforcement learning problem. LTM plasticity is gated by both 
STM action confidence and the presence of reward. (D) Like B and C, but for an autoassociative unsupervised 
learning problem. As above,  
x  corresponds to neural activity and  W  to the network weights, which here are 
recurrent. LTM plasticity is gated by familiarity detection in the STM module. (E) Simulation of a binary classification 
problem,  N = 2000, θ = 0.125, p = 0.1 . There are 20 total stimuli each associated with a random binary (±1) label 
and each appearing with probability  λ = 0.01  at each timestep (otherwise a random stimulus is presented, with 
a random binary label). Plot shows the classification accuracy over time, given by the outputs of the STM and 
LTM of the consolidation model. Shaded region indicates standard deviation over 50 simulations. (F) Simulation 
of a reinforcement learning problem,  
N = 2000, θ = 0.125, p = 1.0 . There are five total stimuli, each appearing 
with probability  λ = 0.01  at each timestep (otherwise a random stimulus is presented), and three possible 
actions. Each stimulus has a corresponding action that yields reward (the reward is randomly sampled for the 
random stimuli). The plot shows average reward per step over time, evaluated using the actions given by the 
STM or LTM (during learning, the STM action was always used). (G) Simulation of an autoassociative learning 
problem.  
N = 4000, p = 1.0 . A single stimulus appears with probability  λ = 0.25  at each timestep, and otherwise 
a random stimulus appears. Recall performance is evaluated by exposing the system to a noisy version of the 
reliable stimulus seen during training, allowing the recurrent dynamics of the network to run for 5 timesteps, and 
measuring the correlation of the final state of the network with the ground- truth pattern.


===== PAGE 7 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  7 of 32
the recall factor measures the familiarity of the stimulus, as highly familiar stimuli will exhibit attractor 
behavior, making  x  and  Wx  highly correlated. Such a quantity could in principle be computed directly, 
for instance if separate dendritic compartments represent the feedforward inputs and the recurrent 
inputs, though such a mechanism is speculative. This quantity can also be approximated using a sepa-
rate novelty readout trained alongside the recurrent weights, which is the implementation we use in 
our simulation. In this approach, a set of familiarity readout weights  
u  receive the neural population 
activity as input, and outputs a scalar signal indicating the familiarity of that activity pattern. These 
familiarity readouts are updated according to their own corresponding memory vector  u∗ = x . The 
output of these weights,  u · x , estimates the familiarity of the activity pattern, and is used as the recall 
factor (see Appendix for more details on when this approximation is equal to the ideal recall factor).
To verify that the advantages of recall- gated consolidation illustrated in Figure 2 apply in these 
tasks, we simulated the three architectures and learning rules described above (see Methods for simu-
lation details). In each case, learning takes place online, with reliable task- relevant stimuli appearing a 
fraction λ of the time, interspersed among randomly sampled unreliable stimuli. In the case of super-
vised and reinforcement learning tasks, unreliable stimuli are paired with random labels and random 
rewards, respectively. Reliable stimuli are associated with consistent labels or action- reward contin-
gencies. We find that recall- gated consolidation provides significant benefits in each case, illustrating 
that the theoretical benefits of increased SNR in memory storage translate to improved performance 
on meaningful tasks (Figure 3E, F and G).
An analytical theory of the recall of repeatedly reinforced memories
We now turn to analyzing the behavior of the recall- gated systems consolidation model more system-
atically, to understand the source of its computational benefits and characterize other predictions 
it makes. To do so, we developed an analytic theory of memory system performance, with and 
without recall- gated consolidation. To make the analysis tractable, our subsequent results assume 
an ideal observer model as in Figure 2C, where we assume the system has direct access to memory 
vectors and can compute the recall factor exactly. Importantly, our framework differs from prior work 
(Fusi et al., 2005; Benna and Fusi, 2016) in considering environments with intermittent repeated 
presentations of the same memory. We adopt several assumptions for analytical tractability. First, as 
in previous studies, we assume that inputs have been preprocessed so that the representations of 
different memories are random and uncorrelated with one another (Gluck and Myers, 1993; Benna 
and Fusi, 2016). We also assume, for now, that each memory consists of an equal number of positive 
and negative entries, although later we will relax this assumption. We are interested in tracking the 
SNR of recall for a given reliable memory. We emphasize that this quantity is an abstract measure of 
system performance reflecting the degree to which a specific set of synaptic changes (a memory trace) 
is retained in the system, and its interpretation varies according to the task in question (Figure 3).
The dynamics of memory storage depend strongly on the underlying synapse model and plasticity 
rule. Given a synaptic model, an important quantity to consider is its associated ‘forgetting curve’ 
m(t), defined as the average SNR of recall for a memory  
w∗  at t timesteps following its first presen-
tation, assuming a new randomly sampled memory has been presented at each timestep since. For 
example, the binary switch model with transition probability p has an associated forgetting curve 
 m(t) ≈
√
Npe−pt
  (Fusi et al., 2005). More sophisticated synapse models, such as the cascade model 
of Fusi et al., 2005 and multivariable model of Benna and Fusi, 2016 achieve power- law forgetting 
curves (see Methods). In the limit of large system size N and under the assumption that memories 
are random, uncorrelated patterns, the forgetting curve is an exact description of the decay of recall 
strength.
Forgetting curves capture the behavior of a system in response to a single presentation of a memory, 
but we are concerned with the behavior of memory systems in response to multiple reinforcements 
of the same memory trace. Thus, another key quantity in our theory is the interarrival distribution p(I), 
which describes the distribution of intervals between repeated presentations of the same memory, 
and its expected value  
τ = E[I] , the average interval length. Our simplest case of interest is the case 
in which a given memory recurs according to a Poisson process; that is, it is reinforced with proba-
bility λ at each timestep, independent of the history of recent reinforcements (as in the simulation in 
Figure 2C). This case corresponds to an exponential interarrival distribution  p(I)= λe−λx
 , with mean 
interarrival time  τ = 1/λ .


===== PAGE 8 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  8 of 32
We now quantify the recall strength for a memory that has been reinforced R times. For the synapse 
models we consider, this quantity can be approximated accurately (see Appendix) by summing the 
strengths of preceding forgetting curves, that is:
 
SNR ≈
R∑
i=1
m
(
ti
)
.
  
(2)
where ti is the time elapsed since the ith reinforcement of the memory. This quantity is a random 
variable whose value depends on the history of interarrival intervals of the memory, and the specific 
unreliable memories that have been stored in intervening timesteps. To more concisely characterize 
a system’s memory performance, we introduce a new summary metric, the learnable timescale of the 
system. For a given target SNR value and allowable probability of error ϵ, the learnable timescale  
τ ϵ
β  
is defined as the maximum interarrival timescale τ for which the  SNR  of recall will exceed β with prob-
ability  1 − ϵ . We fix  ϵ = 0.1  throughout this work; this choice has no qualitative effect on our results. 
Learnable timescale captures the system’s ability to reliably recall memories that are presented inter-
mittently. We note that there exists a close relationship between learnable timescale and the memory 
capacity of the system (the number of memories it can store), with the two quantities becoming linearly 
related in environments with a high frequency of unreliable memory presentations (see Appendix and 
Figure 2—figure supplement 1).
The quantifications of recall SNR and learnable timescale we present in figures are computed 
numerically, as deriving exact analytical expressions for learnable timescale is difficult due to the 
randomness of the interarrival distribution. However, to gain theoretical intuition, we find it useful to 
consider the following approximation, corresponding to an environment in which memories are rein-
forced at deterministic intervals of length τ:
 
SNR ≈
R∑
i=1
m
(
iτ
)
.
  
(3)
This approximation is an upper bound on the true SNR in the limit of small ϵ, and empirically 
provides a close match to the true dependence of  SNR  on R (Figure 2—figure supplement 2). Using 
this approximation allows us to provide closed- form analytical estimates of the behavior of SNR and 
learnable timescale as a function of system and environment parameters.
Theory of recall-gated consolidation
In the recall- gated consolidation model, the behavior of the STM is identical to that of a model without 
systems consolidation. The LTM, on the other hand, behaves differently, updating only in response 
to the subset of memory presentations that exceed a threshold level of recall in the STM. From 
the perspective of the LTM, this phenomenon has the effect of changing the distribution of interval 
lengths between repeated reinforcements of a reliable memory. For exponentially distributed interar-
rival times, the induced effective interarrival distribution in the LTM is also exponential with new time 
constant  
τLTM  given by
 
τLTM ≈
P
(
I < m−1 (
θ
))
1 − Φ
(
θ
) τ .
  
(4)
where I is the (stochastic) length of intervals between presentations of the same reliable memory, θ 
is the consolidation threshold, and  Φ  is the cumulative distribution function of the Gaussian distri-
bution with mean 0 and variance 1. This approximation is valid in the limit of large system sizes N, 
where responses to unreliable memories are nearly Gaussian. For general (non- exponential) interar-
rival distributions, the shape of the effective LTM interarrival distribution may change, but the above 
expression for  τLTM  remains valid.
We note that although the consolidation threshold θ can be chosen arbitrarily, setting it to too high 
a value has the effect of reducing the probability with which reliable memories are consolidated, by 
a factor of  P(I < m−1(θ)) . For large values of θ this reduction can become unacceptably small. For a 
given number of memory repetitions R, we restrict ourselves to values of θ for which the probability 
that no consolidation takes place after R repetitions is smaller than the allowable probability of error 


===== PAGE 9 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  9 of 32
ϵ. Where R is not explicitly reported, we set R=2, which corresponds to analyzing the behavior of the 
model when a memory is reinforced once following its initial presentation.
Recall-gated consolidation increases SNR and learnable timescale of 
memories
For fixed statistics of memory presentations, as the SNR of the STM increases (say, due to increasing N), 
stricter thresholds can be chosen for consolidation which filter out an increasing proportion of unreli-
able memory presentations, without reducing the consolidation rate of reliable memories (Figure 4A, 
Figure 4—figure supplement 1). Consequently, the SNR of the LTM can grow much larger than that 
of the STM, and the amplification of SNR increases with the SNR of the STM. Notably, the SNR of 
the LTM in the recall- gated consolidation model also exceeds that of a control model in which STM 
and LTM modules are both present but do not interact (Figure 4B, Figure 4—figure supplement 1), 
which performs comparably to the STM by itself due to the lack of selective consolidation.
We may also view the benefits of consolidation in terms of the learnable timescale of the system. 
Recall- gated consolidation enables longer learnable timescales, particularly at high target SNRs 
(Figure 4C, Figure 4—figure supplement 2). We note that our definition of SNR considers only noise 
arising from random memory sampling and presentation order. High SNR values may be essential for 
adequate task performance in the face of additional sources of noise, or when the system is asked to 
generalize by recalling partially overlapping memory traces (Benna and Fusi, 2016).
Recall-gated consolidation enables better scaling of memory retention 
with repeated reinforcement
As mentioned previously, higher consolidation thresholds reduce the rate at which reliable memo-
ries are consolidated. However, the consolidation rate of unreliable memories decreases even more 
quickly as a function of the threshold (Figure 4D and E). Hence, higher thresholds increase the frac-
tion of consolidated memories which are reliable, at the expense of reducing the rate of consolidation 
into LTM. This tradeoff may be acceptable if reliable memories are reinforced a large number of times, 
as in this case they can still be consolidated despite infrequent LTM plasticity. In other words, as the 
number of anticipated repetitions R of a single reliable memory increases, higher thresholds can be 
used in the gating function, without preventing the eventual consolidation of that memory. Doing so 
allows more unreliable memory presentations to be filtered out and consequently increases the SNR 
in the LTM (Figure 4F).
Assuming, as we have so far, that reliable memories are reinforced at independently sampled times 
at a constant rate, we show (calculations in Appendix) that the dependence of learnable timescale 
on R is linear, regardless of the underlying synaptic model (Figure 4G, Figure 4C, Figure 4—figure 
supplement 3). Synaptic models with a small number of states, such as binary switch or cascade 
models, are unable to achieve this scaling without systems consolidation (Figure 4G). In particular, 
the learnable timescale is roughly invariant to R for the binary switch model, and scales approxi-
mately logarithmically with R for the cascade model (see Appendix for derivation). Synaptic models 
employing a large number of internal states (growing exponentially with the intended timescale of 
memory retention), like the multivariable model of Benna and Fusi, 2016, can also achieve linear 
scaling of learnable timescale on R. However, these models still suffer a large constant factor reduction 
in learnable timescale compared to models employing recall- gated consolidation (Figure 4G).
Consolidation dynamics depend on the statistics of memory recurrence
The benefit of recall- gated consolidation is even more notable when the reinforcement of reliable 
memories does not occur at independently sampled times, but rather in clusters. Such irregular inter-
arrival times might naturally arise in real- world environments. For instance, exposure to one environ-
mental context might induce a burst of high- frequency reinforcement of the same pattern of synaptic 
updates, followed by a long drought when the context changes. Intentional bouts of study or practice 
could also produce such effects. The systems consolidation model can capitalize on such bursts of 
reinforcement to consolidate memories while they can still be recalled.
To formalize this intuition, we extend our theoretical framework to allow for more general patterns 
of memory recurrence. In particular, we let p(I) indicate the probability distribution of interarrival 
intervals I between reliable memory presentations. So far, we have considered the case of reliable 


===== PAGE 10 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  10 of 32
0
2
0
0
2
0
2
D
H
E
Recall threshold
0
Consolidation rate
100
# Repetitions
k=0.5
k=0.75
k=1
Learnable timescale
# Repetitions
10 102 103
G
Binary
Cascade
Multivariable
1
103
106
F
1 100.1
recall
SNR
100
0
Expected # Repetitions
11 0 102 103 104
0.01
020 310
1
10-2
10-3
10
-5
10-4
10-1
10 102 103
Learnable timescale1
103
C
Recall-gated
Single population
Recall-gated
Single population
Unreliable
Reliable
Target SNR
SNR
N
104 106 107
B
105
N = 107
N = 105
N = 103
STM
LTM (recall-gated)
LTM (parallel)
A
1 102 104
102
101
10
1
0.1
103102
102
103
recall
0.1
0
1 10 100
N = 104
N = 105
N = 106
N = 107
Unreliable
Reliable
PDF of log(recall)
1.5
λ=10-3
λ=10-2
λ=10-1
λ=10-4
1
103
109
106
Learnable timescale
2
PDF of log(recall)
Figure 4. Properties of the recall- gated consolidation model. (A) Distribution (probability density function) of 
reliable and unreliable memory overlaps (on a log scale), varying the number of synapses N,  λ = 10−3  Shaded 
regions indicate consolidation thresholds that preserve 10% of reliable memory presentations. Units are standard 
deviations of the distribution of recall for randomly sampled memories. (B) LTM SNR induced by consolidation 
(with threshold set as in A, to consolidate 10% of reliable memory presentations) as N varies. The parallel model 
uses aslower learning rate (the value of p in the binary switching synapse model is a factor of 10 smaller) in 
the LTM than the STM. (C) Learnable timescale as a function of target SNR, for several values of N, using the 
binary switching synapse model with  
p = 100/
√
N . (D) Distribution of reliable and unreliable memory overlaps, 
with various potential gating thresholds indicated,  N = 104, λ = 10−2 . (E) Fraction of memory presentations 
consolidated (log scale) vs recall threshold for consolidation,  N = 104 . (F) LTM SNR induced by consolidation 
vs. the expected number of repetitions before consolidation occurs,  N = 104 , same color legend as panel E. 
Increasing the expected number of repetitions corresponds to setting a more stringent consolidation threshold 
which filters a higher proportion of reliable memory presentations. (G) Learnable timescale at a target SNR of 10 as 
a function of number of reliable memory repetitions for several underlying synapse models,  
N = 107 . (H) Same as 
G, considering only the multivariable model as the underlying synapse model, and varying the interarrival interval 
regularity factor k.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 4:
Figure supplement 1. Effects of varying rate of reliable memory presentations.
Figure supplement 2. Comparison of different synaptic learning rules.
Figure supplement 3. Same information as Figure 4G, varying the population size N and the desired SNR.
Figure supplement 4. Same information as Figure 4H, varying the population size N and the desired SNR.


===== PAGE 11 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  11 of 32
memories whose occurence times follow Poisson statistics, corresponding to an exponentially distrib-
uted interval distribution. To consider more general occurrence statistics, we consider a family of 
interrarival distributions known as Weibull distributions. This class allows control over an additional 
parameter k which modulates “burstiness” of reinforcement, and contains the exponential distribu-
tion as a special case (k=1). For k<1, reliable memory presentations occur with probability that decays 
with time since the last presentation. In this regime, the same memory is liable to recur in bursts sepa-
rated by long gaps (details in Methods).
Without systems consolidation, the most sophisticated synapse model we consider, the multivari-
able model of Benna and Fusi, 2016, achieves a scaling of learnable timescale that is linear with R 
regardless of the regularity factor k. In fact, we show (see Appendix) that the best possible learnable 
timescale that can achieved by any synaptic consolidation mechanism scales approximately linearly in 
R, up to logarithmic factors. However, for the recall- gated consolidation model, the learnable times-
cale scales as  
R1/k  when  k ≤ 1  (Figure 4H, Figure 4C, Figure 4—figure supplement 3). In this sense, 
recall- gated consolidation outperforms any form of synaptic consolidation at learning from irregularly 
spaced memory reinforcement.
Alternative gating functions suit different environmental statistics and 
predict spaced training effects
Thus far, we have considered a threshold gating function, which is well- suited to environments in 
which unreliable memories are each only encountered once. We may also imagine an environment in 
which unreliable memories tend to recur multiple times, but over a short timescale (Figure 5A, top). 
In such an environment, the strongest evidence for a memory’s reliability is if it overlaps to an interme-
diate degree with the synaptic state (Figure 5A, bottom). The appropriate gating function in this case 
is no longer a threshold, but rather a non- monotonic function of STM memory overlap, meaning that 
memories are most likely to be consolidated if reinforced at intermediate- length intervals (Figure 5B). 
Such a mechanism is straightforward to implement using neurons tuned to particular ranges of recall 
strengths. This model behavior is consistent with spaced learning effects reported in flies (Beck et al., 
2000), rodents (Glas et al., 2021), and humans (Rovee- Collier et al., 1995; Verkoeijen et al., 2005), 
which all show a characteristic inverted U- shaped dependence of memory performance on spacing 
interval.
While some synapse- level models (such as the multivariable synapse model of Benna and Fusi, 
2016) can also give rise to spaced training effects, these effects require that a synapse undergoes 
few additional potentiation or depression events between the spaced reinforcements (Figure  5C, 
Figure 5—figure supplement 1). This is because spacing effects in such models arise when synapse- 
local variables are saturated, and saturation effects are disrupted when other events are interspersed 
between repeated presentations of the same memory. Hence, the spacing effects arising from such 
models are unlikely to be robust over long timescales. Recall- gated systems consolidation, on the 
other hand, can yield spaced training effects robustly in the presence of many intervening plasticity 
events.
Heterogeneous gating functions suit complex environments with 
multiple memories reinforced at different timescales
Thus far we has assumed a dichotomy between unreliable, one- off memories and reliable memories 
which recur according to particular statistics. In more realistic scenarios, there will exist many repeat-
edly reinforced memories, which may be reinforced at distinct timescales. We may be interested in 
ensuring good recall performance over a distribution of memories with varying recurrence statistics. 
For concreteness, we consider the specific case of an environment with a large number of distinct reli-
ably reinforced memories, whose characteristic interarrival timescales are log- uniformly distributed. 
As before, unreliable memories are also presented with a constant probability per timestep.
The recall- gated plasticity model already described, using a threshold function for consolida-
tion, still provides the benefit of filtering unreliable memory traces from the LTM. However, further 
improved memory recall performance is achieved with a simple extension to the model. The LTM 
can be subdivided into a set of subpopulations, each with distinct gating functions that specialize 
for different memory timescales by selecting for different recall strengths (Figure 5D and E). That is, 
one subpopulation consolidates strongly recalled memories, another consolidates weakly recalled 


===== PAGE 12 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  12 of 32
F
B
1 10 100
0
1
Spacing (time steps)
p(consolidation)
AC
D
E
weak reca
ll
strong recall
moderate
recallSTM
LTM
Spacing (time steps)
1 12842 8 16 32 640
SNR
w/o intervening
w/ intervening
2.5
recall
1000.11 10
Reliable
Unreliable
0.1
0
10211 0 103 104 105
recall
Unreliable
Reliable
All
λ=  10-4
λ=  10-3
λ=  10-2
PDF of log(recall)
Memory lifetime
1021 10 103
104
Spacing
106
104
102
108
1010
1
SNR=1
SNR=100
SNR=10
Time
Reliable memory trace
Unreliable memory traces
1.4
2.5
PDF of log(recall)
Figure 5. Alternative memory gating functions. (A) Top: Example sequence of memory presentations where 
unreliable memories (gray) can repeat multiple times, but only within within a short timescale (note gradient 
of light to dark). Bottom: Distribution of reliable and unreliable memory overlaps induced by such memory 
presentation statistics (log scale on x axis). Shaded region indicates overlap values that are at least ten times as 
likely for reliable memories as for unreliable memories. (B) Probability of consolidation, with the gating function 
chosen such that only overlaps within the shaded region of panel A are consolidated, as a function of interarrival 
interval. (C) SNR at 8 timesteps following 5 spaced repetitions of a memory, with spacing interval indicated on the x 
axis, for the multivariable synapse model of Benna and Fusi, 2016 with no systems consolidation. Spaced training 
effects are present at short timescales, but not if other memories are presented during the interpresentation 
intervals. (D) Distribution of recall strengths corresponding to different kinds of memories, in an environment with 
many reliable memories. In the environment model, reliable memories are reinforced with different interarrival 
interval distributions, and the timescales of these distributions for different memories are distributed log- uniformly. 
The environment also has as a background rate of unreliable memory presentations appearing at fraction 0.9 of 
timesteps. (E) Depiction of a generalization of the model in which memories can be consolidated into different 
LTM sub- modules, according to gating functions tuned to different recall strengths (intended to target reliable 
memories with different timescales of recurrence). (F) A consequence of the model outlined in panel E is a smooth 
positive dependence of memory lifetime on the spacing of repetitions, up to some threshold spacing.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 5:
Figure supplement 1. Same information as Figure 5C, varying the learning rate (scale of potentiation/depression 
impulses, relative to the maximum/minimum threshold values in the model of Benna and Fusi, 2016), and the 
length of time following spaced training at which the system’s recall SNR is evaluated.
Figure supplement 2. Same as Figure 5D (top row) and Figure 5F (bottom row), for different population sizes N.
Figure supplement 3. Same as Figure 5D (top row) and Figure 5F (bottom row), for different memory recurrence 
regularity factors (Weibull distribution parameter k).


===== PAGE 13 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  13 of 32
memories, and others lie on a spectrum between these extremes. The effect of this arrangement is 
to assign infrequently reinforced memory traces to subpopulations which experience less plasticity, 
allowing these traces to persist until their next reinforcement. This heterogeneity of timescales is 
consistent with observations in a variety of species of intermediate timescale memory traces (Rosenz-
weig et al., 1993; Cepeda et al., 2008; Davis, 2011).
Studies of spaced training effects have found that the optimal spacing interval during training 
depends on the interval between training and evaluation (Cepeda et al., 2006; Cepeda et al., 2008). 
In particular, the timescale of memory retention is observed to increase smoothly with the spacing 
interval used during training. Our extended model naturally gives rise to this behavior (Figure 5F, 
Figure 5—figure supplement 2, Figure 5—figure supplement 3), due to the fact that the lifetime of 
a consolidated memory scales inversely with the frequency with which memories are consolidated into 
its corresponding LTM subpopulation.
Predicted features of memory representations and consolidation 
dynamics
The recall- gated consolidation model makes a number of key predictions. The most basic conse-
quence of the model is that responsibility for recalling a memory will gradually shift from the STM 
to the LTM as consolidation progresses, rendering the recall performance of the system increasingly 
robust to the inactivation of the STM (Figure 6A). A more specific prediction of the model is the rate 
of updates to the LTM increases with time, as STM recall grows stronger (Figure 6B). The rate of 
LTM updates also increases with reliability of the environment (operationalized as the proportion of 
synaptic update events which correspond to reliable memories; Figure 6B).
B
CD
0
3
SNR
2-10 2-12-7
2-4
2-5
2-6
2-7
λ=
Number of episodes
Fraction of reliable events
22 08
0.1
1.0
ARecall
accuracy
Δ accuracy
(STM lesion)
Time steps
0 1000
0
0.1
0.5
1
SNR
2-8
STM sparsity
LTM sparsity
0
6
2-7
2-6
2-5
2-4
2-3
2-2
2-1
2-8 2-7 2-6 2-5 2-4 2-3 2-2 2-1
14
Rate of consolidation
0
1
STM
LTM
Combined
Memory sparsity
(fraction of modified synapses)
2-4
λ=
λ=
λ=
Figure 6. Predictions of the model. (A) Top: Recall performance for a single reliable memory (true positive rate, 
with a decision threshold set to yield a 10% false positive rate) as learning progresses. Simulation environment 
is the same as in Figure 2C.  
N = 103, λ = 0.25 . Bottom: difference between combined recall performance 
and LTM- only performance. The STM makes diminishing contributions to recall over time. (B) Probability of 
consolidation into LTM increases with experience and with the reliability of the environment (parameterized here 
by the recurrence frequency λ of reliable memories). Simulation environment is the same as in panel A. (C) For a 
single population of binary synapses (no consolidation) and Poisson memory recurrence, mean SNR as a function 
of reliable memory recurrence frequency λ and memory sparsity f. Dots indicate simulation results and solid lines 
indicate analytical approximation. N=1,024. (D) For the systems consolidation model using binary synapses, total 
system SNR (N=256) as a function of memory sparsity in the STM and LTM.


===== PAGE 14 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  14 of 32
The recall- gated consolidation model also makes predictions regarding neural representations in 
the STM and LTM. Until now we have assumed that memories consist of balanced potentiation and 
depression events distributed across the population. However, memories may involve only a sparse 
subset of synapses, for instance if synaptic plasticity arises from neural activity which is itself sparse. 
To formalize this notion, we consider memories that potentiate a fraction f of synapses, and a corre-
spondingly modified binary switch plasticity rule such that potentiation activates synapses with proba-
bility p and depression inactivates synapses with probability  
f
1−f p . We show analytically (see Appendix) 
that in the limit of low f, the SNR- optimizing choice of f is proportional to the rate λ of reliable memory 
reinforcement (Figure 6C). Other factors, such as energetic constraints and noise- robustness, may 
also affect the optimal coding level. In general, however, our analysis shows that environments with 
infrequent reinforcement of a given reliable memory incentivize sparser representations. As the effec-
tive value of λ is amplified in the LTM module, it follows that the LTM benefits from a denser represen-
tation than the STM. Interestingly, we also find that the optimal sparsity in the STM decreases when 
optimizing for the overall SNR of the system—that is, the optimal STM representation is even more 
sparse in the context of supporting LTM consolidation than it would be in isolation. Taken together, 
these two effects result in much denser representations being optimal in the LTM than in the STM 
(Figure 6D). One consequence of denser representations is greater generalization in the face of input 
noise (Babadi and Sompolinsky, 2014), implying that an optimal STM/LTM system should employ 
more robust and generalizable representations in the LTM.
Discussion
We have presented a theory of systems memory consolidation via recall- gated long- term plasticity, 
which provides complementary benefits to synaptic consolidation mechanisms in terms of memory 
lifetime and retrieval accuracy. Its advantage arises from the ability to integrate over the information 
present in an entire neuronal population, rather than individual synapses, in order to decide which 
memory traces are consolidated. This capability is important in environments that induce a mixture 
of reliable and unreliable synaptic updates, in which a system must prioritize which updates to store 
long- term.
Experimental evidence for recall-gated consolidation
The recall- gated consolidation model is by design agnostic to the underlying neural circuit and hence 
potentially applicable to a wide variety of species and brain regions. Here, we summarize evidence 
consistent with recall- gated consolidation in several model organisms. As our proposal is new, the 
experiments we describe were not designed to directly test our model predictions, and thus provide 
incomplete evidence for them. We hope that future work will more directly clarify the relevance of 
our model to these systems as well as others, the mechanisms by which it is implemented, and the 
shortcomings it may have in accounting for experimental results.
Associative learning in insects
In the Drosophila mushroom body, plasticity is driven by activity of dopamine neurons innervating 
a collection of anatomically defined compartments. These contain mushroom body output neurons 
(MBONs) that drive learned behavioral responses, such as approach or avoidance, to sensory stimuli 
(Aso et al., 2014). The compartments are grouped into anatomically defined lobes referred to by 
Greek letters:  
γ, α, β, α′, β′
 . In general the γ lobe compartments are implicated in STM while the  α/β 
 
compartments are implicated in LTM (Aso et al., 2014). Mushroom body dopamine neurons receive 
a wide variety of inputs, including from MBONs themselves (Li et al., 2020). Such inputs provide a 
substrate by which long- term learning can be modulated by the outputs of short- term pathways. 
To implement recall- gated consolidation, the activity of dopamine neurons modulating plasticity in 
LTM compartments should be gated by learning in corresponding short- term pathways. A recent 
study found an instance of this motif (Awata et al., 2019). Short- term aversive learning decreases 
the activity of the  
γ1  MBON (implicated in short- term aversive memory). This  γ1 
 MBON is inhibitory 
and synapses onto a dopamine neuron innervating the  
α2  compartment (which is associated with 
long- term aversive learning). Thus, short- term aversive learing in the  γ1  MBON disinhibits the  α2  
dopamine neuron, allowing for learning to proceed in the LTM  α2  compartment. This circuit is a 


===== PAGE 15 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  15 of 32
precise mechanistic implementation of our recall- gated consolidation model. More work is needed to 
determine if other examples of this motif can be found in Drosophila or other insects.
Motor learning
Several lines of work have indicated that the neural substrate of motor skills can shift with practice. 
In songbirds, learned changes to song performance are initially driven by a cortico- basal ganglia 
circuit called the anterior forebrain pathway (AFB) but eventually are consolidated into the song motor 
pathway (SMP) and become AFB- independent (Andalman and Fee, 2009; Warren et  al., 2011). 
Using transient inactivations of LMAN, a region forming part of the AFB, a recent study quantified the 
degree of AFB- to- SMP consolidation over time and found that it strongly correlated with the bird’s 
motor performance at the time (Tachibana et al., 2022). Although this finding does not establish the 
mechanism for this phenomena, the behavioral result is consistent with our model’s prediction that the 
rate of consolidation should increase as learning progresses in the short- term pathway.
A related motor consolidation process has been observed during motor learning in rats. Exper -
iments have shown that motor cortex disengages from heavily practiced skills (Kawai et al., 2015; 
Hwang et al., 2019), transferring control at least in part to the basal ganglia (Dhawale et al., 2019; 
Dhawale et al., 2021), and that the degree of cortical disengagement tracks motor performance, as 
measured by the variability of learned trajectories (Hwang et al., 2021). This finding is broadly consis-
tent with recall- consolidation, with short- term learning being mediated by motor cortex and long- 
term learning being mediated by basal ganglia. However, we note that unlike in the song learning 
study referenced above, it neither confirms nor rejects our stronger prediction that the rate (rather 
than overall extent) of motor consolidation increases with learning.
Spatial learning and hippocampal replay
Hippocampal replay is thought to be crucial to the consolidation of episodic memories to cortex (Carr 
et al., 2011; Ólafsdóttir et al., 2018). Replay has many proposed computational functions, such as 
enabling continual learning (van de Ven et al., 2020), or optimizing generalization performance (Sun 
et al., 2021), which are outside the scope of our model. However, under the assumption that replay 
enables LTM storage in cortex, the recall- gated consolidation model makes predictions about which 
memories should be replayed—namely, replay should disproportionately emphasize memories that 
are familiar to the hippocampus. That is, we would predict more frequent replay of events or associ-
ations that are frequently encountered than of those that were experienced only once, or unreliably.
Recent experimental work supports this hypothesis. A recent study found that CA3 axonal projec-
tions to CA1, those that respond visual cues associated with a fixed spatial location are recruited more 
readily in sharp- wave ripple events than those that respond to the randomly presented cues (Terada 
et al., 2022). This observation is consistent with our model’s prediction that repeatedly experienced 
patterns of activity are more likely to be consolidated, though other interpretations are possible. Earlier 
work found that sharp- wave ripple events occur more frequently during maze navigation sessions with 
regular trajectories, and increase in frequency over the course of session, similar to the behavior of 
our model in Figure 6B; Jackson et al., 2006. Thus, existing evidence suggests that hippocampal 
replay is biased toward familiar patterns of activity, consistent with a form recall- gated consolidation. 
Other experiments provide preliminary evidence for signatures of such a bias in cortical plasticity. For 
instance, fMRI study of activity in hippocampus and posterior parietal cortex (PPC) during a human 
virtual navigation experiment found that that the recruitment of PPC during the task, which was linked 
with memory performance, tended to strengthen with experience in a static environment, but did 
not strengthen when subjects were exposed to an constantly changing environment, consistent with 
consolidation of only reliable memories (Brodt et al., 2016).
Comparison with synaptic consolidation mechanisms
Recall- gated consolidation improves memory performance regardless of the underlying synapse 
model (Figure 4), indicating that its benefits are complementary to those of synaptic consolidation. 
Our theory quantifies these benefits in terms of the scaling behavior of the model’s maximum learn-
able timescale with respect to other parameters. First, for any underlying synapse model, recall- gated 
consolidation allows the learnable timescale to decay much more slowly as a function of the desired 
SNR of memory storage. Second, recall- gated consolidation achieves (at worst) linear scaling of 


===== PAGE 16 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  16 of 32
learnable timescale as a function of the number of memory reinforcements R. For models with a fixed, 
finite number of internal states per synapse, this scaling is at best logarithmic. Our results therefore 
illustrate that systems- level consolidation mechanisms allow relatively simple synaptic machinery to 
support LTM storage. We note that more sophisticated synaptic models, which involve a large number 
of internal states that scales with the memory timescale of interest (Benna and Fusi, 2016), can also 
achieve linear scaling of learnable timescale with R (although recall- gated consolidation still improves 
their performance by a large constant factor). However, for environmental statistics characterized by 
concentrated bursts of repeated events separated by long gaps, recall- gated consolidation achieves 
superlinear power- law scaling, which we showed is not achievable by any synapse- local consolidation 
mechanism.
Our model provides an explanation for spaced training effects (Figure 5) based on optimal gating 
of LTM consolidation depending on the recurrence statistics of reliable stimuli. It is important to note 
that, depending on the specific form of internal dynamics present in individual synapses, synaptic 
consolidation models can also reproduce spacing effects. For example, the initial improvement of 
memory strength with increased spacing arises in the model of Benna and Fusi, 2016 due to satu-
ration of fast synaptic variables, meaning that the timescale of these internal variables determines 
optimal spacing, and that intervening stimuli can block the effect by preventing saturation (Figure 5). 
In contrast, in our model this timescale is set by population- level forgetting curves, rendering spacing 
effects robust over long timescales and in the presence of intervening events. It is likely that mech-
anisms at both the synaptic and systems level contribute to spacing effects; our results suggest that 
effects observed at longer timescales are likely to arise from memory recall mechanisms at the systems 
level.
Other models of systems consolidation
Unlike previous theories, our study emphasizes the role of repeated memory reinforcement and selec-
tive consolidation. As such, our model has novel capabilities, but also has limitations compared to 
other models of consolidation. As the key insight of our model is distinct from most other theoretical 
work on the subject, we believe that future work will be able to fruitfully integrate the notion of recall- 
gated plasticity into other models of consolidation and attain the benefits of both.
Much prior work focuses on consolidation via hippocampal replay. Prior work has proposed that 
replay (or similar mechanisms) can prolong memory lifetimes (Shaham et al., 2021; Remme et al., 
2021), alleviate the problem of catastrophic forgetting of previously learned information (van de Ven 
et al., 2020; González et al., 2020; Shaham et al., 2021), and facilitate generalization of learned 
information (McClelland et al., 1995; Sun et al., 2021). One prior theoretical study (Roxin and Fusi, 
2013), which uses replayed activity to consolidate synaptic changes from short to long- term modules, 
explored how systems consolidation extends forgetting curves. Unlike our work, this model (and 
related work, such as that of Brea et al., 2023) essentially models consolidation as ‘copying’ synaptic 
weights from one system to another. While such a mechanism has potentially useful consequences, 
such as enabling decoding of the age of a memory (Brea et al., 2023), it does not involve gating 
of memory consolidation, and consequently provides no additional benefit in consolidating repeat-
edly reinforced memories. Our model is thus distinct from, but also complementary to, these prior 
studies. In particular, recall- gated consolidation can be implemented in real- time, without replay of 
old memories. However, as discussed above, selective replay of familiar memories is one possible 
implementation of recall- gated consolidation. Selective replay is a feature of some of the work cited 
above (Shaham et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2021), which suggests it can provide advantages for retention 
and generalization (Shaham et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2021).
Other work has proposed models of consolidation, particularly in the context of motor learning, 
in which one module ‘tutors’ another to perform learned behaviors by providing it with target 
outputs (Murray and Escola, 2017; Teşileanu et al., 2017). Murray and Escola, 2020 proposes a 
fast- learning pathway (which learns using reward or supervision) which tutors the slow- learning long- 
term module via a Hebbian learning rule. In machine learning, a similar concept has become popular 
(typically referred to ‘knowledge distillation’), in which the outputs of a trained neural network are 
used to supervise the learning of a second neural network on the same task (Hinton et al., 2015; 
Gou et al., 2021). Empirically, this procedure is found to improve generalization performance and 
enable the use of smaller networks. Our model can be interpreted as a form of partial tutoring of 


===== PAGE 17 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  17 of 32
the LTM by the STM, as learning in the LTM is partially dictated by outputs of the STM. In this sense, 
our work provides a theoretical justification for the use of tutoring signals between two neural 
populations.
Limitations and future work
In addition to motivating new experiments to test the predictions of a recall- gated consolidation 
model, our work leaves open a number of theoretical questions that future modeling could address. 
Our theory assumes fixed and random representations of memory traces. Subject to this assumption, 
we showed that STM benefits from sparser representations than LTM. In realistic scenarios, synaptic 
updates are likely to be highly structured, and the optimal representations in each module could 
differ in more sophisticated ways. Moreover, adapting representations online—for instance, in order 
to decorrelate consolidated memory traces—may improve learning performance further. Addressing 
these questions requires extending our theory to handle memory statistics with nontrivial correla-
tions. Another possibility we left unaddressed is that of more complex interactions between memory 
modules—for instance, reciprocal rather than unidirectional interactions—or the use of more than two 
interacting systems.
Finally, in this work we considered only a limited family of ways in which long- term consolidation 
may be modulated—namely, according to threshold- like functions of recall in the short- term pathway. 
Considering richer relationships between recall and consolidation rate may enable improved memory 
performance and/or better fits to experimental data. Moreover, in real neural circuits, additional 
factors besides recall, such as reward or salience, are likely to influence consolidation as well. For 
instance, a sufficiently salient event should be stored in LTM even if encountered only once. Further -
more, while in our model familiarity drives consolidation, certain forms of novelty may also incentivize 
consolidation, raising the prospect of a non- monotonic relationship between consolidation probability 
and familiarity. Unlike our notion of recall, which can be modeled in task- agnostic fashion, the impact 
of such additional factors on learning likely depends strongly depend on the behavior in question. Our 
work provides a theoretical framework that will facilitate more detailed models of the rich dynamics of 
consolidation in specific neural systems of interest.
Methods
Theoretical framework
We consider a population of N synapses, indexed by  i ∈
{
1, 2, ..., N
}
  each with a synaptic weight 
 wi ∈ R . The set of synaptic weights across the population can be denoted by the vector  w ∈ RN . The 
synapses may retain additional information besides strength as well; if each synapse carries d- dimen-
sional state information in addition to its strength, the synaptic state can be written as  wi ∈ Rd , with 
the scalar synaptic strengths  wi ∈ R  defined as a function of the high- dimensional state  wi . We define 
memories as patterns of target synaptic weights, following prior work (Benna and Fusi, 2016; Fusi 
et al., 2005). More specifically, we model each memory as a vector  w∗ ∈ RN . By defining memories in 
this fashion, our analysis can remain agnostic to the network architecture and plasticity rule that give 
rise to synaptic modifications. We will typically model memories as binary potentiation/depression 
events for simplicity, but in principle, memories can be continuous valued. Synaptic are updated by 
memories according to a plasticity rule  
( ˜wi)new = l( ˜w, mi) , which maps the synaptic state at the time of 
a memory event to the subsequent synaptic state.
For theoretical calculations, we assume as in prior work (Fusi et al., 2005; Benna and Fusi, 2016), 
that the components of each memory  w∗  are independent and uncorrelated with those of other 
memories (although this assumption is violated in our task learning simulations). We also assume for 
simplicity that memories are mean- centered so that  E[w · w∗
rand]=0   over randomly sampled memories 
 w∗
rand 
.
We define the recall strength associated with memory as the overlap  
r = w · w∗ . This definition 
reflects an ‘ideal observer’ perspective, as it requires direct and complete access to the state of the 
synaptic population. The ideal observer perspective provides an upper bound on the recall perfor -
mance of a real system, and should be a fairly good approximation assuming that memory readout 
mechanisms are sophisticated enough. We are particularly interested in the normalized recall strength


===== PAGE 18 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  18 of 32
 
SNR = w · w∗
√
Ew∗
rand
[(
w · w∗
rand
)2],
  
(5)
where the expectation is taken over randomly sampled memories  w∗
rand . We refer to this quantity as 
the signal- to- noise ratio (SNR) of memory recall.
Synaptic models and plasticity rules
In this paper, we primarily consider three synaptic models and corresponding plasticity rules, taken 
from prior work.
The first and simplest is is a ‘binary switch’ model in which synapses take on binary ( ± 1) values 
and stochastically activate (resp. inactivate) in response to positive (resp. negative) values of a memory 
vector with probability p (Amit and Fusi, 1994). No auxiliary state variables are used in this model.
The second is the ‘cascade’ model of Fusi et al., 2005, in which synapses are modeled as a Markov 
chain with a finite number 2 k of discrete states with transition probabilities dependent on the kind of 
memory event (potentiation or depression). Half the states (states  
a1, ..., ak ) are considered potenti-
ated (strength +1) and half (states  b1, ..., bk 
) are depressed (strength –1). Intuitively, states of the same 
potentiation level correspond to different propensities for plasticity in the synapse, enabling a form of 
synaptic consolidation. Formally, for i<k, the potentiated state a
i (resp. depressed state bi) transitions 
to state  ai+1  (resp.  bi+1 
) with probability  
αi
1−α  following a potentiation (resp. depression) event. And 
for i<k, the potentiated state ai (resp. depressed state bi) transitions to state b1 (resp. a1) with proba-
bility  αi−1  following a depression (resp. potentiation) event. For i=k this latter transition occurs with 
probability  
αi−1
1−α ; as described in Fusi et al., 2005, this choice is made for convenience to ensure equal 
occupancy of the different synaptic states. We assume  α = 0.5  throughout.
The third synaptic model is the model of Benna and Fusi, 2016, which we refer to as the ‘multi-
variable’ model. In this model, synapses are described by a chain of m interacting continuous- valued 
variables  u1, ..., um , the first of which corresponds to synaptic strength. Potentiation and depression 
events increment or decrement the value of the first synaptic variable, and a set of difference equa-
tions governs the evolution of the multidimensional state at each time step:
 
dui
dt = n−2i+2α
(
ui−1 − ui
)
− n−2i+1α
(
ui − ui+1
)
,  (6)
where n and α a parameter of the model (we assume  n = 2, α = 0.5  throughout). This model also 
provides the ability for synapses to store information at different timescales, due to the information 
retained in auxiliary variables.
Model implementation for example tasks
Supervised Hebbian learning
We simulated a single- layer feedforward network with a population of N=1,000 input neurons (activity 
denoted by  x ) and a single output neuron, (activity denoted by  y ), connected with a 1×N binary 
weight matrix  W , such that  ^y= Wx . In each simulation, a set of P=20 reliable stimuli were randomly 
generated, which corresponded to binary (  ± 1
N ) random N- dimensional activity patterns in the input 
neurons. Note that due to the scaling of the inputs and use of binary synaptic weights, the activity 
 y  is constrained to lie in the interval  
[
−1, 1
]
 . Each reliable stimulus was associated with a randomly 
chosen (but consistent across the simulation) label y, 1 or –1. At each time step, one of the reliable 
stimuli (along with its label) was presented to the network with probability  λi = 0.01  for all  i = 1, ..., P . 
Otherwise (with probability  1 − ∑
i λi ), a randomly sampled unreliable stimulus was presented with 
a randomly chosen label. Memory vectors (written as matrices since the synaptic weights are inter -
preted as a matrix) were given by a Hebbian learning rule  W∗ = yxT
 , corresponding to the product of 
the binary input neuron activity and the corresponding label. Learning followed the binary switch rule 
with p=0.1; that is, positive entries in the memory vector resulted in potentiation with probability p, 
and likewise for negative entries and depression. At each timestep, the product of the STM output 
and the ±1 label was computed, and if it exceeded the consolidation threshold  θ = 0.125 , plasticity 
was permitted in the LTM network.


===== PAGE 19 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  19 of 32
Reinforcement learning
We used the same setup as in the supervised learning task, with the following modifications. Instead 
of a single readout, the network had A=3 output neurons corresponding to different possible actions. 
The activity of the output neuron a (denoted by π a) represented the unnormalized log probabiliy 
of taking action a: 
 
p(a)= eβπa
∑
j eβπj
 
, where β is a parameter controlling the stochasticity of the action 
selection (we set β=10 in our simulations). For the purposes of learning, the STM outputs were used 
to compute action probabilities, but both the STM and the LTM were evaluated throughout training. 
Each of the 5 reliable stimuli was associated with a correct action. Taking the correct action yielded 
a reward of 1, while taking the other action yielded a reward of 0. Unreliable stimuli were associated 
with randomly sampled correct actions. Memory vectors were derived from the following three- factor 
learning rule:  
W∗ = reward · (axT) , where  a  is a one- hot vector with a value of 1 at the index of the 
chosen action. At each timestep the product  πa · reward  was computed, and if it exceeded the consol-
idation threshold, plasticity was permitted in the LTM network. All other parameters were the same as 
in the supervised learning simulation.
Unsupervised Hebbian learning
We simulated two recurrent neural networks with N=1,000 binary neurons each and with binary recur-
rent weight matrices  WSTM  and  WLTM , respectively. Memories consisted of binary (entries equal to 
 ± 1
N ) random N- dimensional vectors that provided direct input  x  to the network neurons at each time-
step. The network state  h  evolved for T=5 timesteps according to the following dynamics equation:
 ht+1 = Wϕ
(
h
)
+ x,  (7)
where  ϕ  is a binary threshold nonlinearity with threshold set so that 50% of neurons were active 
at each time step (corresponding to a mechanism that normalizes activity across the network). The 
weights  W  of the network were binary and initialized as binary random variables with equal on/off 
probability. On each trial a stimulus was presented, which with probability  λ = 0.25  was a (randomly 
sampled but consistent) reliable stimulus, and otherwise was a newly randomly sampled unreliable 
stimulus. The network weights Wij were subjected to potentiation events when x i and xj were both 
active at t=0, and otherwise subjected to depression events. Synaptic updates followed the binary 
switch rule with probability P=1.0.
Additionally, a set of N weights  u  connected the STM neurons to a single readout neuron that 
measured familiarity. These weights were also binary and updated according to their own memory 
vector  u∗ . They experienced candidate potentiation/depression events when their corresponding 
stimulus input neuron was active/inactive, respectively (i.e. the memory entry  u∗
i   was equal to x i). 
These weights followed the binary switch rule with probability p=1.0.
Plasticity in the LTM proceeded according to the same rule as in the STM but was gated by recall 
strength  r = u · xSTM , according to a threshold function with threshold equal to 0.25.
The performance of the network was determined by presenting noise- corrupted versions of the 
single reliable stimulus and measuring the correlation between the network state and the uncorrupted 
memory after T=5 time steps. The corrupted patterns were obtained by adding Gaussian noise of 
variance  
1
N = 0.001  to the ground- truth pattern, and binarizing the result by choosing the fraction 0.5 
of neurons with the highest values to be active.
Forgetting curves for different synaptic plasticity rules
Prior work (Fusi et al., 2005; Benna and Fusi, 2016) has considered environments in which a given 
memory is presented to the system only once. In this case, the performance of a single population 
of synapses with a given plasticity rule depends crucially on the memory trace function m(t). This is 
defined as
 
m
(
t
)
= w
(
t
)
· w∗
√
Ew∗
rand
[(
w
(
t
)
· w∗
rand
)2],
  
(8)


===== PAGE 20 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  20 of 32
the recall SNR at time t for a memory  w∗  presented at t=0, assuming randomly sampled memories 
have been presented in the intervening timesteps. For the binary switch model,  m(t) ≈
√
Npe−pt
 . More 
sophisticated synaptic models, like the cascade and multivariable models, can achieve power- law 
scalings (Fusi et al., 2005; Benna and Fusi, 2016). The key feature of these models that enables 
power- law forgetting is that their synapses maintain additional information besides their weight, 
which encodes their propensity to change state. In this fashion, memories can be consolidated at 
the synaptic level into more stable, slowly decaying traces. The cascade model of Fusi et al. achieves
 
m
(
t
)
≈
√
N
t log T e−t/T
  
(9)
for some characteristic timescale T which can be chosen as a model parameter. Hence, its perfor -
mance is upper bounded by
 
m
(
t
)
≈
√
N
t log t .
  
(10)
The model of Benna and Fusi can achieve
 
m
(
t
)
≈
√ N
t log T e−t/T
  
(11)
which is upper bounded by
 
√ N
t log t .
  
(12)
Benna and Fusi also show that  
√
N/t  scaling is an upper bound on the performance of any synapse 
model with finite dynamic range.
Implementation of SNR and learnable timescale computations
To compute recall strengths associated with single synaptic populations, we first sampled interar -
rival intervals I from the environmental statistics p(I). Given a number of repetitions R, we computed 
recall strength samples  r′ = ∑R
i m(ti) , where m is the forgetting curve associated with the underlying 
synaptic plasticity rule,  ti = ∑
j≥i Ij , and the I j are independent samples from p(I). We scaled recall 
strengths by a factor of  
1√
N  to compute the recall SNR (an approximation that is exact in the large- N 
limit).
To compute recall strengths associated with the recall- gated consolidation model, we repeated 
the above procedure using a new interarrival distribution  p(ILTM)  induced by the gating model. The 
induced distribution  ILTM  is obtained by drawing as samples the lengths of intervals between consec-
utive interarrival interval samples for which the corresponding recall SNR in the STM exceeds the 
gating threshold θ (corresponding to the interval between consolidated reliable memory presenta-
tions), and rescaling it by the fraction of unreliable memories that are consolidated. Strictly speaking, 
in the general case this distribution is nonstationary, as the probability of STM recall exceeding the 
threshold can change as synaptic updates accumulate across repetitions for sophisticated synapse 
models like that of Benna and Fusi, 2016. We adopt a conservative approximation that ignores such 
effects and thus slightly underestimates the rate of consolidation when such synaptic models are used 
(and consequently underestimates the SNR and learnable timescale of the recall- gated consolidation 
model). With this approximation, the random variable  
ILTM  is defined as as the following mixture 
distribution
 
˜ILTM =
j∑
i=1
Ii w.p. q
(
1 − q
)j−1 ,
ILTM =
˜ILTM
∑ ˜ILTM
t=1 1
[
ζt > θ
],
  
(13)
where each  Ii ∼ p(I), ζt ∼ N(0, 1) , q indicates the probability of a reliable memory presentation 
inducing consolidation, and  1[·]  denotes an indicator function, equal to 1 or 0 depending on whether 


===== PAGE 21 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  21 of 32
the condition is met. The value of j corresponds to the number of reinforcements that go by between 
instances of consolidation. For sufficiently large τ this distribution can be approximated by
 
ILTM =
j∑
i=1
Ii
1 − Φ
(
θ
) w.p. q
(
1 − q
)j−1 ,
  
(14)
where  Φ  is the CDF of the standard normal distribution. For large N, the probability of consolidation 
 q = P(I < m−1(θ)) .
We note that for an exponential interarrival distribution with mean τ, the induced distribution of 
 ILTM  is also exponential, with mean  τLTM = P
(
I<m−1 (
θ
))
1−Φ
(
θ
)
 . This is because the sums of j independent 
samples Ii are distributed according to a Gamma distribution with shape parameter j, and the mixture 
of such Gamma distributions with geometrically distributed mixture weights  p(j)= q(1 − q)j−1
  is itself 
an exponential distribution with mean  τ /q 
.
For a given number of expected memory repetitions R, the gating threshold θ was set such that 
at least one of the R repetitions would be consolidated with probability  
1 − ϵ, ϵ = 0.1 . Where R is not 
reported, we assume it equal to 2, the minimum number of repetitions for the notion of consolidation 
to be meaningful in our model.
To compute learnable timescales, we repeated the above SNR computations over a range of mean 
interarrival times  τ = E
[
I
]
 , keeping the interarrival distribution family (Weibull distributions with a 
fixed value of k, see below) constant. We report the maximum value of τ for which the SNR exceeds 
the designated target threshold with probability  1 − ϵ, ϵ = 0.1 .
Throughout, for our interarrival distributions we use Weibull distributions with regularity parameter 
k. The corresponding cumulative distribution function is
 P
(
I ≤ t
)
=1 − e−
(
tΓ
(
1+1/k
)
/τ
)k
.  (15)
where  τ = E[I] , and Γ is the Gamma function. In the case k=1, this reduces to an exponential distri-
bution of interarrival intervals, which corresponds to memory reinforcements that occur according to 
a Poisson process with rate  λ = 1/τ . In the limit  k →∞  , it corresponds to interarrival intervals of deter-
ministic length τ. For k<1, the interarrival distribution is ‘bursty’, with periods of dense reinforcement 
separated by long gaps.
Spacing effect simulations
We simulated the multivariable synapse model of Benna and Fusi, 2016, in which each synapse is 
described by m continuous- valued dynamical variables  
u1, ..., um  which evolve as follows:
 
dui
dt = n−2i+2α
(
ui−1 − ui
)
− n−2i+1α
(
ui − ui+1
)
.  (16)
For the first variable u1, in place of  ui−1  we substitute components mj of the memory traces. For the 
last variable um, in place of  ui+1  we substitute 0. The strength of each synapse corresponds to the value 
of its first dynamical variable. For our simulations, we chose m=10 dynamical variables, n=2,  α = 0.5 , 
and N=400 synapses. The value of α is also varied in Figure 5—figure supplement 3. A spacing 
interval Δ was selected and a randomly drawn reliable memory was presented at Δ-length intervals 
(the same pattern at each presentation). In the case without intervening memories, the dynamics of 
each synapse ran unimpeded between these presentations. In the case with intervening memories, 
new randomly drawn patterns were presented to the system at each timestep between the reliable 
memory presentations. Each pattern was drawn with values equal to ± 1/2, with equal probability.
Generalized model with multiple memory timescales
In our generalized environment model, the environment contains a variety of distinct reliable memo-
ries xi which recur with Poisson statistics at a variety of rates λ i. Timescales  τi = 1/λi  are distributed 
as  p(log τ ) ∼ [0, A]  where A is a large constant. This corresponds to the value of  logλ 
 being uniformly 
distributed in  
[−A, 0] , or equivalently to  p(λ) ∼ 1/λ  and bounded between  e−A  and 1. The environ-
ment also contains an additional fraction of unreliable memories as before, sampled randomly and 
presented with a fixed probability at each timestep. The natural generalization of learnable timescale 


===== PAGE 22 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  22 of 32
to this setting is the maximum interarrival interval timescale for which the lifetime of a corresponding 
memory (the time following last reinforcement its recall strength decays to an SNR below the target 
SNR) exceeds that timescale.
The distribution of interarrival intervals for memory i is
 p
(
Ii
)
= λie−λi Ii .  (17)
Integrating across the distribution of λ, we get the distribution of interarrival intervals for reliable 
memories observed by the system:
 
preliable
(
I
)
≈ Elogλ∼U
([
−A,0
])
[
λe−λI
]
≈
´ λ=1
λ=e−A
1
λ λe−λIdλ
≈
´ 1
0 e−λIdλ
≈
´ 1
0 e−λIdλ
= 1 − e−I
I
≈ 1/I   
(18)
for large I.
The full distribution of interval strengths (including unreliable memories) is a mixture of  preliable  
and a delta function at  I = ∞ , with the latter’s weight corresponding to the probability with which an 
unreliable memory is sampled at a given timestep (in our simulations we chose 0.9).
From here we can compute a distribution of STM recall strengths r
 
p
(
r
)
=
ˆ
p
(
I
)
m
(
I
)
dI.
  (19)
We simulated a model in which an ensemble of LTM subpopulations are assigned gating func-
tions  gi(r)  equal 1 for  log r ∈ [Ai, Ai+1]  and 0 elsewhere, with the Ai spaced evenly over  
[
0, 1
2 logN
]
 . The 
expected lifetime of a memory reinforced with a given interval  I′  is given approximately by the STM 
lifetime divided by the fraction of memory presentations for which the recall strength lies in the same 
interval as  m(I′) . This quantity reflects the proportion of memories presentations that are consolidated 
into the same LTM subpopulation as the memory in question.
Acknowledgements
We thank Stefano Fusi and Samuel Muscinelli for helpful discussions and comments on the manu-
script. ALK and JL were supported by the Gatsby Charitable Foundation, NSF award DBI- 1707398. 
JL was also supported by the DOE CSGF (DE- SC0020347). ALK was also supported by the Burroughs 
Wellcome Foundation, the McKnight Endowment Fund, the Mathers Foundation, and NIH award 
R01EB029858.
Additional information
Funding
Funder Grant reference number Author
Gatsby Charitable 
Foundation
Jack W Lindsey
Ashok Litwin-Kumar
National Science 
Foundation
DBI-1707398 Jack W Lindsey
Ashok Litwin-Kumar
Department of Energy CSGF (DE-SC0020347) Jack W Lindsey
Burroughs Wellcome Fund Ashok Litwin-Kumar
McKnight Foundation Ashok Litwin-Kumar


===== PAGE 23 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  23 of 32
Funder Grant reference number Author
Mathers Foundation Ashok Litwin-Kumar
National Institutes of 
Health
R01EB029858 Ashok Litwin-Kumar
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the 
decision to submit the work for publication.
Author contributions
Jack W Lindsey, Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Writing - original draft, Writing - review and 
editing; Ashok Litwin- Kumar, Conceptualization, Writing - review and editing
Author ORCIDs
Jack W Lindsey  
   http://orcid.org/0000-0003-0930-7327
Ashok Litwin- Kumar  
  
 http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2422-6576
Peer review material
Reviewer #2 (Public Review): https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793.3.sa1
Reviewer #3 (Public Review): https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793.3.sa2
Author response https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793.3.sa3
Additional files
Supplementary files
•  MDAR checklist 
Data availability
The current manuscript is a theoretical study, so no data have been generated for this manuscript.
References
Amit DJ, Fusi S. 1994. Learning in neural networks with material synapses. Neural Computation 6:957–982. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.1994.6.5.957
Andalman AS, Fee MS. 2009. A basal ganglia- forebrain circuit in the songbird biases motor output to avoid 
vocal errors. PNAS 106:12518–12523. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0903214106, PMID: 19597157
Aso Y, Hattori D, Yu Y , Johnston RM, Iyer NA, Ngo TTB, Dionne H, Abbott LF , Axel R, Tanimoto H, Rubin GM. 
2014. The neuronal architecture of the mushroom body provides a logic for associative learning. eLife 
3:e04577. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.04577, PMID: 25535793
Awata H, Takakura M, Kimura Y , Iwata I, Masuda T, Hirano Y . 2019. The neural circuit linking mushroom body 
parallel circuits induces memory consolidation in Drosophila. PNAS 116:16080–16085. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 
1073/pnas.1901292116, PMID: 31337675
Babadi B, Sompolinsky H. 2014. Sparseness and expansion in sensory representations. Neuron 83:1213–1226. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2014.07.035, PMID: 25155954
Beck CD, Schroeder B, Davis RL. 2000. Learning performance of normal and mutant Drosophila after repeated 
conditioning trials with discrete stimuli. The Journal of Neuroscience 20:2944–2953. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 
1523/JNEUROSCI.20-08-02944.2000, PMID: 10751447
Benna MK, Fusi S. 2016. Computational principles of synaptic memory consolidation. Nature Neuroscience 
19:1697–1706. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.4401, PMID: 27694992
Brea J, Clayton NS, Gerstner W. 2023. Computational models of episodic- like memory in food- caching birds. 
Nature Communications 14:2979. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-38570-x, PMID: 37221167
Brodt S, Pöhlchen D, Flanagin VL, Glasauer S, Gais S, Schönauer M. 2016. Rapid and independent memory 
formation in the parietal cortex. PNAS 113:13251–13256. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1605719113, 
PMID: 27803331
Carr MF, Jadhav SP , Frank LM. 2011. Hippocampal replay in the awake state: a potential substrate for memory 
consolidation and retrieval. Nature Neuroscience 14:147–153. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.2732, PMID: 
21270783
Cepeda NJ, Pashler H, Vul E, Wixted JT, Rohrer D. 2006. Distributed practice in verbal recall tasks: A review and 
quantitative synthesis. Psychological Bulletin 132:354–380. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.132.3.354, 
PMID: 16719566
Cepeda NJ, Vul E, Rohrer D, Wixted JT, Pashler H. 2008. Spacing effects in learning: A temporal ridgeline of 
optimal retention. Psychological Science 19:1095–1102. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02209. 
x, PMID: 19076480


===== PAGE 24 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  24 of 32
Cervantes- Sandoval I, Martin- Peña A, Berry JA, Davis RL. 2013. System- like consolidation of olfactory memories 
in Drosophila. The Journal of Neuroscience 33:9846–9854. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0451-13. 
2013, PMID: 23739981
Davis RL. 2011. Traces of Drosophila memory. Neuron 70:8–19. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2011.03. 
012, PMID: 21482352
Dhawale AK, Wolff SBE, Ko R, Ölveczky BP . 2019. The Basal Ganglia Can Control Learned Motor Sequences 
Independently of Motor Cortex. bioRxiv. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1101/827261
Dhawale AK, Wolff SBE, Ko R, Ölveczky BP . 2021. The basal ganglia control the detailed kinematics of learned 
motor skills. Nature Neuroscience 24:1256–1269. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-021-00889-3, PMID: 
34267392
Dubnau J, Chiang AS. 2013. Systems memory consolidation in Drosophila. Current Opinion in Neurobiology 
23:84–91. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2012.09.006, PMID: 23084099
Frankland PW, Bontempi B. 2005. The organization of recent and remote memories. Nature Reviews. 
Neuroscience 6:119–130. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn1607, PMID: 15685217
Frémaux N, Gerstner W. 2015. Neuromodulated spike- timing- dependent plasticity, and theory of three- factor 
learning rules. Frontiers in Neural Circuits 9:85. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fncir.2015.00085, PMID: 
26834568
Fusi S, Drew PJ, Abbott LF . 2005. Cascade models of synaptically stored memories. Neuron 45:599–611. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2005.02.001, PMID: 15721245
Gardner E. 1988. The space of interactions in neural network models. Journal of Physics A 21:257–270. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1088/0305-4470/21/1/030
Glas A, Hübener M, Bonhoeffer T, Goltstein PM. 2021. Spaced training enhances memory and prefrontal 
ensemble stability in mice. Current Biology 31:4052–4061. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2021.06.085, 
PMID: 34324833
Gluck MA, Myers CE. 1993. Hippocampal mediation of stimulus representation: A computational theory. 
Hippocampus 3:491–516. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/hipo.450030410, PMID: 8269040
González OC, Sokolov Y , Krishnan GP , Delanois JE, Bazhenov M. 2020. Can sleep protect memories from 
catastrophic forgetting? eLife 9:e51005. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.51005, PMID: 32748786
Gorriz MH, Takigawa M, Bendor D. 2023. The Role of Experience in Prioritizing Hippocampal Replay. bioRxiv. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.28.534589
Gou J, Yu B, Maybank SJ, Tao D. 2021. Knowledge distillation: A survey. International Journal of Computer Vision 
129:1789–1819. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11263-021-01453-z
Hebb DO. 1949. The Organization of Behavior: A Neuropsychological Theory. Wiley.
Hinton G, Vinyals O, Dean J. 2015. Distilling the Knowledge in a Neural Network. arXiv. https://arxiv.org/abs/ 
1503.02531
Hopfield JJ. 1982. Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collective computational abilities. PNAS 
79:2554–2558. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.79.8.2554, PMID: 6953413
Hwang EJ, Dahlen JE, Hu YY , Aguilar K, Yu B, Mukundan M, Mitani A, Komiyama T. 2019. Disengagement of 
motor cortex from movement control during long- term learning. Science Advances 5:eaay0001. DOI: https:// 
doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aay0001, PMID: 31693007
Hwang EJ, Dahlen JE, Mukundan M, Komiyama T. 2021. Disengagement of motor cortex during long- term 
learning tracks the performance level of learned movements. The Journal of Neuroscience 41:7029–7047. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3049-20.2021, PMID: 34244359
Jackson JC, Johnson A, Redish AD. 2006. Hippocampal sharp waves and reactivation during awake states 
depend on repeated sequential experience. The Journal of Neuroscience 26:12415–12426. DOI: https://doi. 
org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4118-06.2006, PMID: 17135403
Joel D, Niv Y , Ruppin E. 2002. Actor- critic models of the basal ganglia: new anatomical and computational 
perspectives. Neural Networks 15:535–547. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/s0893-6080(02)00047-3, PMID: 
12371510
Kandel ER, Dudai Y , Mayford MR. 2014. The molecular and systems biology of memory. Cell 157:163–186. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2014.03.001, PMID: 24679534
Kawai R, Markman T, Poddar R, Ko R, Fantana AL, Dhawale AK, Kampff AR, Ölveczky BP . 2015. Motor cortex is 
required for learning but not for executing a motor skill. Neuron 86:800–812. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
neuron.2015.03.024, PMID: 25892304
Lahiri S, Ganguli S. 2013. A memory frontier for complex synapses. Advances in Neural Information Processing 
Systems. 1034–1042.
Li F, Lindsey JW, Marin EC, Otto N, Dreher M, Dempsey G, Stark I, Bates AS, Pleijzier MW, Schlegel P , Nern A, 
Takemura S- Y , Eckstein N, Yang T, Francis A, Braun A, Parekh R, Costa M, Scheffer LK, Aso Y , et al. 2020. The 
connectome of the adult Drosophila mushroom body provides insights into function. eLife 9:e62576. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.62576, PMID: 33315010
Lindsey J, Markowitz JE, Datta SR, Litwin- Kumar A. 2024. Dynamics of Striatal Action Selection and 
Reinforcement Learning. bioRxiv. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.14.580408
McClelland JL, McNaughton BL, O’Reilly RC. 1995. Why there are complementary learning systems in the 
hippocampus and neocortex: insights from the successes and failures of connectionist models of learning and 
memory. Psychological Review 102:419–457. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.102.3.419, PMID: 
7624455


===== PAGE 25 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  25 of 32
McClelland JL, Goddard NH. 1996. Considerations arising from a complementary learning systems perspective 
on hippocampus and neocortex. Hippocampus 6:654–665. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1098-1063(1996) 
6:6<654::AID-HIPO8>3.0.CO;2-G, PMID: 9034852
Murray JM, Escola GS. 2017. Learning multiple variable- speed sequences in striatum via cortical tutoring. eLife 
6:e26084. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.26084, PMID: 28481200
Murray JM, Escola GS. 2020. Remembrance of things practiced with fast and slow learning in cortical and 
subcortical pathways. Nature Communications 11:6441. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-19788-5, 
PMID: 33361766
Ólafsdóttir HF, Bush D, Barry C. 2018. The role of hippocampal replay in memory andplanning. Current Biology 
28:R37–R50. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2017.10.073, PMID: 29316421
Remme MWH, Bergmann U, Alevi D, Schreiber S, Sprekeler H, Kempter R. 2021. Hebbian plasticity in parallel 
synaptic pathways: A circuit mechanism for systems memory consolidation. PLOS Computational Biology 
17:e1009681. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009681, PMID: 34874938
Rosenzweig MR, Bennett EL, Colombo PJ, Lee DW, Serrano PA. 1993. Short- term, intermediate- term, and 
long- term memories. Behavioural Brain Research 57:193–198. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0166-4328(93) 
90135-d, PMID: 8117424
Rovee- Collier C, Evancio S, Earley LA. 1995. The time window hypothesis: Spacing effects. Infant Behavior and 
Development 18:69–78. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0163-6383(95)90008-X
Roxin A, Fusi S. 2013. Efficient partitioning of memory systems and its importance for memory consolidation. 
PLOS Computational Biology 9:e1003146. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003146, PMID: 
23935470
Shaham N, Chandra J, Kreiman G, Sompolinsky H. 2021. Stochastic Consolidation of Lifelong Memory. bioRxiv. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.08.24.457446
Squire LR, Alvarez P . 1995. Retrograde amnesia and memory consolidation: a neurobiological perspective. 
Current Opinion in Neurobiology 5:169–177. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0959-4388(95)80023-9, PMID: 
7620304
Sun W, Advani M, Spruston N, Saxe A, Fitzgerald JE. 2021. Organizing Memories for Generalization in 
Complementary Learning Systems. bioRxiv. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.10.13.463791
Tachibana RO, Lee D, Kai K, Kojima S. 2022. Performance- dependent consolidation of learned vocal changes in 
adult songbirds. The Journal of Neuroscience 42:1974–1986. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1942- 
21.2021, PMID: 35058370
Terada S, Geiller T, Liao Z, O’Hare J, Vancura B, Losonczy A. 2022. Adaptive stimulus selection for consolidation 
in the hippocampus. Nature 601:240–244. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-04118-6, PMID: 34880499
Teşileanu T, Ölveczky B, Balasubramanian V. 2017. Rules and mechanisms for efficient two- stage learning in 
neural circuits. eLife 6:e20944. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.20944, PMID: 28374674
van de Ven GM, Siegelmann HT, Tolias AS. 2020. Brain- inspired replay for continual learning with artificial neural 
networks. Nature Communications 11:4069. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-17866-2, PMID: 
32792531
Verkoeijen PPJL, Rikers RMJP , Schmidt HG. 2005. Limitations to the spacing effect: demonstration of an 
inverted u- shaped relationship between interrepetition spacing and free recall. Experimental Psychology 
52:257–263. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1027/1618-3169.52.4.257, PMID: 16302534
Warren TL, Tumer EC, Charlesworth JD, Brainard MS. 2011. Mechanisms and time course of vocal learning and 
consolidation in the adult songbird. Journal of Neurophysiology 106:1806–1821. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1152/ 
jn.00311.2011, PMID: 21734110

===== PAGE 26 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  26 of 32
Appendix 1
Derivation of recall strength quantity for specific plasticity rules
In the following derivations, we derive the recall factors for various learning rules, which correspond 
to different choices of  W∗ . The recall factor is defined as the elementwise dot product between W 
and  W∗ , which we denote as  W · W∗ . We make use of the fact that this elementwise dot product 
between the matrices is equal to  Tr[WTW∗] .
Supervised Hebbian learning
Let x be the input population activity, W be the prediction weights,  ^y= Wx  the output population 
activity (predicted probabilities), and y indicate ground- truth target values. A supervised Hebbian 
plasticity rule gives rise to a memory vector (interpreted here as a matrix since the synaptic weights 
form a matrix)  W∗ = yxT
 , and thus the recall strength  r = W · W∗  can be written as
 
W · W∗ = W · (yxT)
= Tr[(yxT)TW]
= Tr[yxTW]
= x · (yTW)T
= xTWTy
=( Wx)Ty
= ˆy · y,   
(20)
corresponding to the accuracy of the prediction  y .
Reinforcement learning
Let x be the input population activity representing state information, W be the output weights, 
and  π = Wx  be the output population activity representing unnormalized log probabilities of 
taking different actions  a ∈
{
1, ..., A
}
 , so that 
 
p(a)= eβπa
∑
j eβπj
 
, where β is a parameter controlling the 
stochasticity of the action selection. Let a be a one- hot vector indicating the sampled action, and 
 r = ±1  be the scalar reward that results. For a reinforcement learning rule giving rise to a memory 
vector  W∗ = reward · (axT) , the recall strength  r = W · W∗  can be written as
 
W · W∗ = W ·
(
reward · axT
)
= reward ·
(
axT
)T
W.  
(21)
Following the same steps as the derivation for the supervised learning case, with a in place of y, 
gives
 
W · W∗ = reward ·
((
Wx
)T a
)
= reward ·
(
πTa
)
= reward · πa,   
(22)
 
= reward ·

log p
(
a
)
+ log

∑
j
eβπj



 ,
  
(23)
corresponding to the unnormalized log probability with which the action a was selected (which can 
be interpreted as the confidence in the selection), modulated by reward.
Computing this factor requires preserving the network’s action probability distribution, extracting 
from it the probability of the sampled action, and multiplicatively scaling the result by the obtained 
reward.

===== PAGE 27 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  27 of 32
Autoassociative memory
Let x be the population activity and W be the recurrent weight matrix. For an autoassociative memory 
storage rule with memory vector  W∗ = xxT , assuming that the weight matrix W can be approximated 
as a sum  
∑
i xixT
i   over prior plasticity- driven updates, then the recall strength  r = W · W∗  can be 
written as
 
W · W∗ = W · (xxT)
=
(∑
i
(xixT
i )
)
· (xxT)
=
(∑
i
(xixT
i
) · (xxT)
)
= ∑
i
Tr[(xixT
i
)T(xxT)]
= ∑
i
Tr[xixT
i
xxT]
= ∑
i
xT
i
xTr[xixT]
= ∑
i
(xT
i x)2,
  
(24)
corresponding the familiarity of the current pattern x relative to all previously seen patterns  xi .
Familiarity also be computed with a separate familiarity readout trained alongside the recurrent 
weights. If the familiarity readout employs a Hebbian rule, the resulting estimate of familiarity will 
be equal to
 
∑
i
(
xT
i x
)
.
  
(25)
For uncorrelated patterns in a network below capacity, this strategy corresponds exactly to the 
true recall factor in the limit of large network size.
Relationship between learnable timescale and capacity
We note that theoretical work on memory systems often focuses on memory capacity, the number 
of memories that can be reliably stored in the system (Gardner, 1988; Fusi et al., 2005; Benna and 
Fusi, 2016). Our learnable timescale metric is distinct from capacity. However, the two are closely 
linked in a particular regime. Suppose P distinct reliable memories are reinforced independently at 
rates  λ1, ..., λP . In the regime in which the overall rate of reliable memory presentation  λtot = ∑
i λi  
is small, the SNR of memory recall for memory i will be the same as in the case of a single reliable 
memory with  λ = λi  (Figure  2—figure supplement 1). Hence, for a fixed  λtot , and for simplicity 
assuming that distinct reliable memories are presented at equal rates  λi = 1
P λtot  for all i, the learnable 
timescale  τ ∗  of the system dictates its capacity, equal to  τ ∗λtot . We note that this correspondence 
does not hold in the case where most observed memories are reliable. In this work, however, we 
are interested primarily in the regime of scarce reliability, where recall- gated consolidation provides 
the most benefit. In this regime, we regard the learnable timescale as the most natural measure 
of system performance, as the primary obstacle to memory storage is the presence of long gaps 
between reinforcements of reliable memories.
The effect of repeated reinforcement on memory dynamics without 
recall-gated consolidation
When memories can recur multiple times, the memory trace function m(t) is no longer an adequate 
description of system behavior, as the synaptic updates from multiple presentations can combine. 
For the synaptic plasticity rules we consider here – the binary switch, the cascade model of Fusi et al., 
and the multivariable model of Benna & Fusi, this combination is approximately additive (Benna and 
Fusi, 2016). This is because for each of these plasicity rules, the change in distribution of synaptic 
states following the presentation of a memory is approximately independent of the existing synaptic 
state. The only dependencies are saturation effects – synapses which have reached the edge of their 
dynamic range – which can only lead to sub- additive behavior. Saturation effects can be avoided by 
making the dynamic range of synapses sufficiently large. Thus for these plasticity rules of interest we 
may consider additive memory trace combination to represent a close approximation (and a tight 
upper bound) on the combined memory trace strength.

===== PAGE 28 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  28 of 32
For a reliable memory presented at times  t1, ..., tR , and a population of synapses using additive 
plasticity rules, the current SNR at time t can therefore be approximated as
 
SNR
(
t
)
=
R∑
i=1
m
(
t − ti
)
.
  
(26)
If memory presentations occur separated by regular intervals of length  τ = 1
λ , we have
 
SNR
(
t
)
=
R−1∑
i=0
m
(
t − tR + iτ
)
.
  
(27)
For the binary switch model, m(t) decays exponentially with time constant  1/p , and so the second 
term is negligible compared to the first. Hence the learnable timescale of the system is the same as 
the memory lifetime, approximately  1/p . For target SNR threshold δ, we require  p ≥ δ/
√
N 
, so the 
best possible learnable timescale, optimizing over p, is  
O(
√
N/δ) .
For the cascade model, m(t) decays as  
√
N
tlogT e−t/T
 . For  t ≫ T  the exponential factor dominates, 
resulting in the same behavior as the binary switch model. For  t ≪ T , the exponential term 
approximately vanishes, so the following expression for  SNR(t)  is a close approximation and tight 
upper bound:
 
SNR
(
t
)
≈
√
N(
t − tR
)
log T +
´ min
(
R,T/τ
)
1
√
N
τ · t log T dt
=
√
N(
t − tR
)
log T +
√
N
τ log T log
[
min
(
T/τ , R
)]
=
√
N(
t − tR
)(
log R + logτ
) +
√
N
τ
(
log R + logτ
) log R.
  
(28)
Again, for computing learnable timescale we are interested in when  t − tR ≈ τ , in which case:
 
SNR(t) ≈
√
N
τ
log R
log R + log τ .
  
(29)
For the multivariable model, m(t) decays as  
√
N
t log T e−t/T
 . Again we are primarily interested in the 
 t ≪ T  regime, in which the expression for  SNR(t)  is approximately
 
SNR(t) ≈
√
N√t − tR
√log T +
´ min
(
R,T/τ
)
1
√
N√τ · t√log T dt
=
√
N√t − tR
√log T + 2
√
N√τ √log T
(√
log
(
T/τ , R
)
− 1
)
.
  
(30)
This SNR is maximized for  T ≈ R · τ . And for computing learnable timescale we are interested in 
when  t − tR ≈ τ . So we have
 
SNR
(
t
)
=
√
N√
τ log
(
R · τ
)
(
2
√
R − 1
)
.
  
(31)
To compute the learnable timescale at target SNR δ for  1 ≪ R ≪ τ , we have  4NR ≥ τ log(Rτ )δ2
 , 
the solution of which is within logarithmic factors of  O(RN) .
The above calculations assume deterministic interarrival intervals of length τ. In general, we are 
interested in an interarrival distribution p(I) with mean τ. However, we show numerically that for 
Weibull distributions with reasonable values of k (not too close to zero), the true learnable timescale 
figures are very bounded very closely to our results above (Figure  2—figure supplement 2). 
Moreover, for the purpose of computing learnable timescale  τ β
ϵ   with error probability tolerance ϵ, 
for sufficiently small ϵ the deterministic approximation represents an upper bound on the SNR for 
distributions with mean τ. This is because to ensure high SNR with very high probability, deterministic 
intervals are a best case scenario, as stochastic interval lengths will with some nonzero probability 
deviate far above the mean.

===== PAGE 29 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  29 of 32
Bounds on an ideal synaptic consolidation model
In this section we show that no realistic synapse- local mechanism can achieve significantly better 
learnable timescale than  O(RN) , and hence that the ability of recall- gated systems consolidation to 
achieve learnable timescale scaling superlinearly with R in some environments (see previous section) 
represents a qualitative advantage.
We consider a very general class of synaptic plasticity rules. In particular, we suppose a synapse 
can main tain a history of sequences of potentiation and depression events for arbitrarily long time 
windows and track the number of windows for which Δ, the difference in number of potentiation and 
depression events, exceeds a threshold δ. Let  
preliable(∆; τ )  refer to the probability distribution of 
values of Δ after τ timesteps, given that a synapse is potentiated by the reliable memory of interest 
– and  punreliable  refers to the analogous distribution for synapses subject only to potentiation by 
unreliable memories. After  
T
τ   intervals of length τ, for a synapse potentiated by the reliable memory, 
we have that
 
E
[
log
(
p
(
reliable|data
)
p
(
unreliable|data
)
)]
= T
τ DKL
(
preliable
(
∆; τ
)
||punreliable
(
∆; τ
))
.
  
(32)
The memory can be considered retrievable with SNR of order  O
(
1
)
  once the expression above 
exceeds  O
(
1
N
)
  (since evidence can be accumulated across the N synapses) for any choice of τ (since 
we are interested in the best achievable performance).
Now, for large enough τ,  punreliable(∆; τ )  is approximately Gaussian with mean 0 and standard 
deviation  
√τ  . Conditioned on the reliable memory being presented r times in τ timesteps,  preliable(∆)  
is approximately Gaussian with mean r and standard deviation  
√τ  . The KL divergence between 
these two distributions is  
r2
2τ  . Now consider the distribution  pτ (r)  of number of repetitions r that 
occur in a time window τ. We want to find a value  rmax  such that  Pτ (r ≥ rmax) ≤ τ
T . From there we can 
assume that  r < rmax  in any of the τ- length intervals, since after T timesteps we cannot reliably count 
on r exceeding  rmax  in any of the intervals.
For  τ ≤ M
[
I
]
 , the median of the distribution p(I), note that  rmax ≤ log(T/τ ) ≤ log T . For  τ ≤ c · M
[
I
]
 , 
if  R > clog T  then at least one interval of less than length  M
[
I
]
  contains at least  log T  repetitions. 
Hence  rmax ≤ clog T 
. So conservatively we can take  
rmax = τ
M
[
I
] log T .
Thus, our log probability expression above is bounded as follows
 
E
[
log
(
p
(
reliable|data
)
p
(
unreliable|data
)
)]
= T
τ DKL
(
preliable
(
∆; τ
)
||punreliable
(
∆; τ
))
≤ T
τ
rmax2
2τ
= T
τ
τ 2
M
[
I
]2
log2 (
T
)
2τ
= T log2 (
T
)
2M
[
I
]2 .
  
Hence the KL divergence criterion becomes
 
T log2 (
T
)
2M
[
I
]2 ≥ O
( 1
N
)
,
  
(33)
or equivalently,
 TN log2T ≥ 2M
[
I
]2 .  (34)
The number of repetitions is  R ≈ T/E
[
I
]
 , giving
 
RN log2 (
RE
[
I
])
≥ 2M
[
I
]2
E
[
I
] ,
  (35)

===== PAGE 30 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  30 of 32
 RN log2 (
RE
[
I
])
≥ 2E
[
I
]
,  (36)
assuming  M
[
I
]
∼ O
(
E
[
I
])
 . For the interarrival distributions we consider (of the Weibull family), 
 M
[
I
]
< E
[
I
]
 
 so this is a conservative assumption. Hence the learnable timescale of any population 
using only synapse- local plasticity rules is no greater than the solution for  
E
[
I
]
 
 of the equation above. 
We have
 
RN ≥ 2E
[
I
]
/log2 (
RE
[
I
])
,  (37)
the solution of which is within logarithmic factors of  O
(
RN
)
 .
Scaling behavior of the STM/LTM model
In the recall- gated consolidation model, the overlap  r = wSTM · w∗
STM  indicates the recall strength of 
memory x given the current synaptic state of the STM. LTM plasticity is modulated by a factor g(r) 
– we refer to g as the “gating function” and r as the STM recall strength. We assume for now that 
the gating function g(r) is chosen to be a threshold function,  g
(
r
)
= H
(
r − θ
)
 , where r is the SNR 
of the memory overlap, H is the Heaviside step function, and θ is referred to as the “consolidation 
threshold.” With this choice, unreliable memories will be consolidated at a rate of  1 − Φ
(
θ
)
 , where 
 Φ  is the CDF of the normal distribution, in the limit of large system size N.
Suppose a memory  w∗  is presented twice with interval I. Then the SNR at the second presentation 
will be lower- bounded by m(I), in expectation. It follows that the rate at which reliable memories 
will be consolidated at for the gating function above is lower bounded by  P(I < m−1(θ)) . After R 
repetitions of the reliable memory, the probability that consolidation has occurred will be at least
 1 − (1 − P(I < m−1(θ)))R.  (38)
We are interested in the maximum θ for which this expression exceeds  1 − ϵ  – this is the most 
stringest consolidation threshold we can set while still ensuring consolidation of the reliable memory 
with high probability. This value of θ is given by
 R log(1 − P(I < m−1(θ)) = log ϵ  (39)
If R is large then the solution will be such that  P(I < m−1(θ))  is small, enabling the approximation:
 P
(
I < m−1 (
θ
))
= −log ϵ/R  (40)
For tractability we consider, as our family of interarrival distributions, Weibull distributions with 
regularity parameter k. The cumulative distribution function is
 P
(
I ≤ t
)
=1 − e
(
tΓ
(
1+1/k
)
/τ
)k
.  (41)
For  t << τ , this is approximated as
 P
(
I ≤ t
)
≈
(
tΓ
(
1 + 1/k
)
/τ
)k .  (42)
Importantly,  P
(
I ≤ t
)
  decays as tk. Thus, increasing the number of repetitions R has the effect of 
scaling the τ that satisfies Equation 40 by  R1/k . That is, for a fixed θ, and hence a fixed degree of 
amplification  τLTM/τ  of the effective rate of reliable memories in the LTM, the maximum τ achieving 
that SNR with probability  1 − ϵ  (i.e. the learnable timescale  τ ϵ
β ) scales as  O
(
R1/k
)
 .
For a gating function threshold θ, the corresponding SNR in the LTM will be the SNR induced by 
an interarrival distribution  ILTM  with mean value
 
E
[
ILTM
]
=
P
(
I < m−1 (
θ
))
1 − Φ
(
θ
) E
[
I
]
.
  
(43)
Since  1 − Φ
(
θ
)
  decays much more rapidly than any power of  m−1 (
θ
)
 
, it follows that  
E
[
ILTM
]
 
 can 
be made O(1), and thus the SNR of the LTM can become  
O
(√
N
)
 
, for relatively small values of θ 
(and hence a small number of required repetitions). In other words, for a fixed number of expected 

===== PAGE 31 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  31 of 32
memory repetitions, the learnable timescale of the LTM decreases only slightly as the target SNR is 
raised from O(1) to  O
(√
N
)
 .
Note that if P different reliable memories are present, then  E
[
ILTM
]
 
 for any given reliable memory 
will be lower- bounded by  
O
(
P
)
 
 instead of  
O
(
1
)
 
. The induced SNR for any given reliable memory in 
the LTM will in this case be of order m(P), rather than  
O
(√
N
)
 
.
Optimal sparsity calculations
We now consider the case of sparse memories – those which potentiate a fraction f of synapses. 
Consider the behavior of a single population of binary synapses employing the binary switch 
plasticity rule. We modify the plasticity rule slightly so that potentiation flips the state of a synapse 
with probability p and depression with probability  
f
1−f p , to ensure that the fractions of potentiated 
and depressed synapses remain balanced.
We consider an environment with a single reliable memory that is presented with probability λ at 
each time step (otherwise, a randomly sampled unreliable memory is presented). We can compute 
the behavior analytically by tracking how the distributions of u (the output neuron response to true 
stimuli) and v (the output neuron response to noise) evolve over time. We assume that the coding 
level f is sufficiently small that terms of order  O
(
f 2
)
  may be ignored.
Due to the balanced plasticity rule,  
1
2  of synapses are strong at any given time, so the mean 
response  v∗  to a randomly sampled noise pattern is  
1
2 . The variance of v is also constant and equal 
to  
1
4Nf  .
The evolution of u is a stochastic process that, in the limit of large Nf (i.e. a large number of active 
neurons for each stimulus), can be described as an Ornstein- Uhlenbeck (OU) process:
 ∆u = θ
(
u∗ − u
)
+ ϵ.  (44)
where  ϵ ∼ N(0, σ 2) 
In the limit of small f we have:
 θ = p
(
2f + λ
)
  (45)
 
u∗ = f + λ
2f + λ = 1
2 + λ
4f +2 λ .
  (46)
The quantity  u∗  determines the asymptotic mean of u and the quantity θ determines the rate at 
which u converges to this mean. Immediately we see that  u∗  scales with the frequency λ with which 
the true stimulus is presented, and that the rate of convergence (speed of learning) is proportional 
to p.
By well- known properties of OU processes, the asymptotic variance of u is equal to  
σ2
2θ . In the 
small- p limit, this quantity comes out to
 
Var
(
u
)
= 1
4Nf .
  (47)
Note that in the low- p limit (slow learning rate) this is the same as the variance of v. Thus in the 
limit of slow learning, we have that
 
E
[
u − v
]
= λ
4f +2 λ ,
  (48)
 
Var
(
u − v
)
= 1
2Nf .
  (49)
And thus
 
SNR = N
2
fλ2
(
2f + λ
)2 .
  (50)

===== PAGE 32 =====
 Research article
Neuroscience
Lindsey and Litwin- Kumar. eLife 2023;12:RP90793. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.90793  32 of 32
From this expression we can see that for a given f, the asymptotic SNR always increases with λ and 
N. For a given λ, we would like to maximize this expression with respect to f.
 
∇ fSNR = N
2
(
2f + λ
)2 λ2 − fλ2 ·4
(
2f + λ
)
(
2f + λ
)4 .
  
(51)
This expression equals zero when
 
(
2f + λ
)2 λ2 − fλ2 · 4
(
2f + λ
)
=0   (52)
 
(
2f + λ
)
=4 f   (53)
 f = 1
2 λ,  (54)
so the asymptotic SNR is maximized for  f = 1
2 λ . That is, the optimal coding level is proportional to 
the frequency with which reliable (as opposed to unreliable) stimuli are observed in the environment.