

===== PAGE 1 =====
Articles
https:/ / doi.org/10.1038/s41593-018-0232-z
1Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA. 2Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA.  
*e-mail: mmattar@princeton.edu
A 
hallmark of adaptive behavior is the effective use of experi -
ence to maximize reward1. In sequential decision tasks such 
as spatial navigation, actions can be separated from their 
consequences in space and time. Anticipating these consequences 
to choose the best actions thus often requires integrating multiple 
intermediate experiences from pieces potentially never experienced 
together
2,3. For instance, planning may involve sequentially retriev-
ing experiences to compose a series of possible future situations 4,5. 
Recent theories suggest that humans and animals selectively engage 
in such prospective planning as appropriate to the circumstances 
and suggest that omitting such computations could underlie habits 
and compulsion
6–8. However, by focusing only on whether or not to 
deliberate about the immediate future, these theories largely fail to 
address how the brain chooses which of the many possible experi
-
ences to consider during such evaluation, a selection process that 
ultimately governs which decisions are made.
In addition to prospective planning, behavioral and neuroimag
-
ing data suggest that actions can also be evaluated by integrating 
experiences before decisions are needed. Indeed, future decisions 
can be predicted not only from prospective neural activity
5 but 
also from neural reinstatement when relevant information is first 
learned
9 and during subsequent rest 10,11 (Fig. 1a). Y et this further 
highlights the selection problem: if actions can be evaluated long 
before they are needed, which experiences should the brain con
-
sider at each moment to set the stage for the most rewarding future 
decisions? Addressing this question requires a more granular theory 
of memory access for action evaluation, which takes forward plan
-
ning as a special case of general value computation.
A window into patterns of memory access is offered by the hip -
pocampus12. During spatial navigation, hippocampal place cells 
typically represent an animal’s spatial position, though they can 
also represent locations ahead of the animal during movement 
pauses
13–15. For instance, during ‘sharp wave ripple’ events, activ -
ity might progress sequentially from the animal’s current location 
toward a goal location14,15. These ‘forward replay’ sequences predict 
subsequent behavior and have been suggested to support a planning 
mechanism that links actions to their consequences along a spatial 
trajectory
15. However, this pattern is also not unique: activity in the 
hippocampus can also represent locations behind the animal 14,16–19 
and can even represent altogether disjoint, remote locations (par -
ticularly during sleep20,21; Fig. 1a). Collectively, these three patterns 
(forward, reverse, and offline replay) parallel the circumstances dis-
cussed above, in which reinstatement in humans predicts choice. 
The various patterns of hippocampal replay have been suggested to 
support a range of distinct functions such as planning
13,15, learning 
through credit assignment 16,19,22, memory retrieval 23,24, consolida -
tion23,25, and forming and maintaining a cognitive map 18. Y et we 
still lack a theory describing how these various functions of replay 
come together to promote adaptive behavior and predicting which 
memories are replayed at each time and in which order.
To address this gap, we develop a normative theory to predict not 
just whether but which memories should be accessed at each time to 
enable the most rewarding future decisions. Our framework, based 
on the Dyna reinforcement learning (RL) architecture
26, views 
planning as learning about values from remembered experiences, 
a perspective that generalizes and reconceptualizes work on trad -
eoffs between model-based and model-free controllers6,7. We derive, 
from first principles, the utility of retrieving each individual experi-
ence at each moment to predict which memories a rational agent 
ought to access to lay the groundwork for the most rewarding future 
decisions. This utility is formalized as the increase in future reward 
resulting from such memory access and is shown to be the product 
of two terms: a gain term that prioritizes states behind the agent 
when an unexpected outcome is encountered and a need term that 
prioritizes states ahead of the agent that are imminently relevant. 
Notably, this theory at present investigates which of all possible 
memories would be most favorable to access in principle; it is not 
intended as (but may help point the way toward) a mechanistic or 
process-level account of how the agent might efficiently find them.
To test the implications of our theory, we simulate a spatial navi
-
gation task in which an agent generates and stores experiences that 
can be later retrieved. We show that an agent that accesses memories 
in order of utility produces patterns of sequential state reactivation 
that resemble place cell replay, reproducing qualitatively and with 
Prioritized memory access explains planning and 
hippocampal replay
Marcelo G. Mattar   1* and Nathaniel D. Daw   1,2
T o make decisions, animals must evaluate candidate choices by accessing memories of relevant experiences. Y et little is known 
about which experiences are considered or ignored during deliberation, which ultimately governs choice. We propose a norma-
tive theory predicting which memories should be accessed at each moment to optimize future decisions. Using nonlocal ‘replay’ 
of spatial locations in hippocampus as a window into memory access, we simulate a spatial navigation task in which an agent 
accesses memories of locations sequentially, ordered by utility: how much extra reward would be earned due to better choices. 
This prioritization balances two desiderata: the need to evaluate imminent choices versus the gain from propagating newly 
encountered information to preceding locations. Our theory offers a simple explanation for numerous findings about place 
cells; unifies seemingly disparate proposed functions of replay including planning, learning, and consolidation; and posits a 
mechanism whose dysfunction may underlie pathologies like rumination and craving.
Nature NeuroscieNce | www.nature.com/ natureneuroscience

===== PAGE 2 =====
Articles NaTUre NeUrOscieNce
no parameter-fitting a wealth of empirical findings in this literature, 
including (i) the existence and balance between forward and reverse 
replay, (ii) the content of replay, and (iii) the effects of experience. We 
propose the unifying view that all patterns of replay during behavior, 
rest, and sleep reflect different instances of a general state-retrieval 
operation that integrates experiences across space and time to propa
-
gate reward information and guide decisions. This framework for -
malizes and unifies aspects of the various putatively distinct functions 
of replay previously proposed, and it may shed light onto related psy
-
chiatric disorders including cravings, hallucinations, and rumination.
r esults
We address how best to order individual steps of computation, 
known as Bellman backups (Fig. 1b–d), for estimating an action’s 
a
d
Need termGain term
eg
f
Random policyLearned policy
Need
Gain
0
00
Optimal action
Q < Qsecond-best
Q (sk , ak) /uni2190 rk + /uni03B3V (s/uni2032k)
Q < Qbest
Nonoptimal action(s)
Change in Q from backup Change in Q from backup
Large
effect on policy
High gainLow gain
Small or no
effect on policy
/uni03B2 = 20
/uni03B2 = 10
/uni03B2 = 5
/uni03B2 = 2
/uni03B2 = 1
Greedy
0
100
200
Number of 
steps to reward
01 02 0
Episode
01 0
Episode
20
No replay
Random replay
Prioritized replay
b
c Open fieldL inear track
Actions
s
States
Bellman backup:
Value
ak
rk
sk
Fig. 1 | a rational model of prioritized memory access. a, Three ways an agent might learn, through sequential memory access, the relationship between 
actions and rewards. Left: when reward is first encountered, through reverse reactivation; center: during sleep or rest through ‘offline’ reactivation of 
the sequence; right: prior to choice, by prospective (forward) activation. The latter case is the most commonly envisioned in theories of model-based 
deliberation, but replay of all three sorts exists, and human neuroimaging evidence suggests that all can support decisions. b, Schematic of a Bellman backup 
in which the reactivation of a nonlocal experience 
/uni2032=es ar s(, ,, )kk kk k  propagates the one-step reward rk and the discounted value of /uni2032sk to the state–action pair 
(sk, ak). c, Grid-world environments simulated. Left: a two-dimensional maze (Sutton’s Dyna maze26) with obstacles. Right: a linear track simulated as two 
disjoint segments (to reflect the unidirectionality of the hippocampal place code on linear tracks) with rewards in opposite ends. d, Performance of a greedy 
agent in the two simulated environments. Replaying experiences according to the proposed prioritization scheme speeds learning compared to learning 
without replay or with replay of randomly ordered experiences. Left, open field; right, linear track. Dotted lines represent optimal performance. e, The gain 
term for updating the value of a target action in a target state quantifies the expected increase in reward following a visit to the target state. Left: if the best 
action is updated with a higher value, the policy changes little or nothing, resulting in a small or zero gain. Right: if a nonoptimal action is updated with value 
higher than the best action’s value, the policy in the corresponding state changes, resulting in a large gain. Here squares represent states, triangles represent 
actions, and the arrow represents a Bellman backup that updates the value of an action. The highlighted triangle represents the action with highest estimated 
value. f, For a greedy agent (one who always chooses the best action; blue line), the gain is positive either when the best action is found to be worse than 
the second best action (left, changing the policy to disfavor it) or when a suboptimal action is found to be the best action (right, changing the policy to favor 
it). In both cases, the amount of gain increase depends on how much better the new policy is. Otherwise, the gain is zero, reflecting no effect on the policy. 
For a nongreedy agent (one who sometimes chooses random exploratory actions; thin gray lines), changes in Q values that do not change the best action 
can nonetheless affect the degree of exploration, leading to nonzero gain (β, softmax inverse temperature parameter). Note that a perfectly symmetric gain 
around zero amounts to absolute prediction error. g, The need term for a particular target state corresponds to its expected future occupancy, measuring 
how imminently and how often reward gains can be harvested there. This is shown as a heat map over states, and also depends on the agent’s future action 
choice policy. For example: top: random policy (initially); bottom: learned policy (following training).
Nature NeuroscieNce | www.nature.com/ natureneuroscience

===== PAGE 3 =====
ArticlesNaTUre NeUrOscieNce
value. A Bellman backup updates an estimate of the future value 
of taking a particular action in some ‘target’ state by summing the 
immediate payoff received for the action with the estimated future 
value of the successor state that follows it. Stringing together multi
-
ple backup operations over a sequence of adjacent states and actions 
computes aggregate value over a trajectory.
To analyze the optimal scheduling of individual steps of value 
computation, we derive the instantaneous utility of every possible 
individual Bellman backup: the expected increase in future reward 
that will result if the backup is executed (see Methods for formal 
derivation). The intuition is that a backup, by changing an action’s 
value, can result in a better action being preferred at the target state, 
leading to better rewards if that state is ever visited. Thus, the utility 
of a backup can be intuitively understood as the increase in reward 
following each visit to the target state, multiplied by the expected 
number of times the target state will be visited: the product of a gain 
term and a need term, respectively. The gain term quantifies the 
increase in discounted future reward expected from a policy change 
at the target state, that is, it measures how much more reward the 
agent can expect to harvest following any visit to the target state 
due to what it learns from the update (Fig. 1e). Notably, this value 
depends on whether the update changes the agent’s policy, mean
-
ing that (in contrast to other prioritization heuristics considered in 
artificial intelligence
27–29), the theory predicts asymmetric effects 
of positive and negative prediction errors due to their differential 
effects on behavior (Fig. 1f). To determine priority, the gain term is 
multiplied by the need term, which quantifies the number of times 
the agent is expected to harvest the gain by visiting the target state 
in the future. Here earlier visits are weighted more heavily than later 
visits due to temporal discounting. This weighting implies that the 
need term prioritizes the agent’s current state and others likely to be 
visited soon (Fig. 1g).
To explore the implications of this theory, we simulate an agent’s 
behavior in two spatial navigation tasks (Fig. 1c). First, we simulate 
a linear track on which the agent shuttles back and forth to collect 
rewards at the ends, a task widely used in studies of hippocampal 
replay (Fig. 1c). Second, we simulate a two-dimensional field with 
obstacles (walls) in which the agent needs to move toward a reward 
placed at a fixed location, a task used extensively in previous RL 
studies
1,26,28 (Fig. 1c). In both tasks, the agent learns which actions 
lead to reward by propagating value information through Bellman 
backups. We assume that when the agent is paused (here before 
starting a run and upon receiving a reward), it may access nonlo -
cal memories, and that it does so in order of utility. By reactivating 
memories sequentially, value information can be propagated along 
spatial trajectories that may have never been traversed continuously 
by the agent. In particular, value information can be propagated 
backward by chaining successive backups in the reverse direction, 
or it can be propagated forward by chaining successive backups in 
the forward direction. The latter case is achieved by allowing the 
agent to look one step deeper into the value of an action. That is, we 
consider the utility of all individual backups and, in particular, one 
that extends the previous backup with one extra state and updates 
the values of all actions along a trajectory. This approach allows 
for symmetric forward and reverse updates that have comparable 
effects along all the states of a trajectory. To connect the theory 
to hippocampal recordings, we assume that this local operation is 
accompanied by place cell activity at the target location.
Memory access and learning. We first predicted that prioritized 
memory access speeds learning. In both environments, we contrast 
an agent that accesses memories in prioritized order with a model-
free agent that learns only by direct experience and with an agent 
that replays experiences drawn at random (original Dyna
26). In all 
cases, the number of steps to complete a trial (i.e., to find the reward) 
gradually declines as the agent learns the task. Learning with pri
-
oritized experience replay progresses faster due to rapid propaga -
tion of value information along relevant trajectories (Fig. 1d).  
Note that our theory predicts that a model-free agent is nonetheless 
able to learn this type of task, albeit more slowly, in line with empir
-
ical demonstrations that disrupting replay slows learning without 
abolishing it
24.
Context-dependent balance between forward and reverse 
sequences. A major prediction of our theory is that patterns of 
memory access are not random, but often involve patterned trajec-
tories. In our simulations, as in hippocampal recordings, replayed 
locations typically followed continuous sequences in either forward 
or reverse order (Fig. 2). In the model, this is because backups tend 
to produce situations that favor adjacent backups. In particular, our 
theory predicts two predominant patterns of backup, driven by the 
two terms of the prioritization equation.
First, when an agent encounters a prediction error, this pro
-
duces a large gain behind the agent (Fig. 2a–f ), reflecting the value 
of propagating the new information to predecessor states where it 
is relevant to choice. Following this backup, gain now recursively 
favors propagating the information toward that state’s predecessors, 
and so on. Thus, following an unexpected reward, sequences tend 
to start at the agent’s location and move backwards toward the start 
state (Fig. 2c,f). Because the need term is largest for states the agent 
expects to visit next (Fig. 2e), and since following reward the agent 
returns to the start for a new trial, prioritized backups often extend 
backwards, depth-first, even in a two-dimensional environment 
(Fig. 2f and Supplementary Fig. 1). The depth-first pattern reflects 
the agent’s expectation that it will return to the reward in the future 
following a trajectory similar to that followed in the past, in contrast 
to the breadth-first pattern observed in alternative prioritization 
heuristics that do not include a need term
27–29.
The need term, instead, tends to be largest in front of the agent 
(Fig. 2g–l). When it dominates, sequences tend to start at the agent’s 
location and move forward toward the goal (Fig. 2i,l). They tend 
to iterate forward because, when following a forward sequence of 
n steps, an adjacent step can extend it to an n +  1-step backup that 
carries information about each preceding action. This pattern is 
observed whenever the utility of looking one step deeper into the 
value of the actions along the route is sufficiently high.
The model thus predicts when different patterns of backup 
(driven by fluctuating gain and need) are likely to occur. To quan
-
tify this in simulation, we classifiy each backup as forward or reverse 
(see Methods). In line with rodent hippocampal recordings on the 
linear track, we observe that replay (driven by need) extends for
-
ward before a run (Fig. 3a), providing information relevant for 
evaluating future trajectories. In contrast, replay extends back
-
ward upon completing a run (driven by gain; Fig. 3a), providing a 
link between behavioral trajectories and their outcomes. Very few 
reverse sequences are observed prior to a run, or forward sequences 
after completing a run, in line with previous findings
14 (Fig. 3b). 
Note that the need term must be greater than zero for either pattern 
to occur (Supplementary Fig. 2).
Statistics of replayed locations: current position, goals,  
and paths. In addition to directionality, the theory predicts which 
particular routes should be considered, which ultimately deter -
mines the locations of behavioral change. Coarsely, replay should be 
biased toward relevant locations, such as the agent’s position (due to 
high need) and reward sites (due to high gain). Such general biases 
arise from the average over individual replay trajectories, which are 
patterned due to the influence of locations like reward sites on both 
the need and gain terms.
In our simulations, most significant events start in locations at or 
immediately behind the agent and extend in either direction (Fig. 4a). 
 
Empirical results on the linear track support this prediction:  
Nature NeuroscieNce | www.nature.com/ natureneuroscience

===== PAGE 4 =====
Articles NaTUre NeUrOscieNce
hippocampal events display an ‘initiation bias’ , a tendency to begin 
at the animal’s location14,16,17 (Fig. 4b).
Sequences that start at the animal’s location can, nonetheless, 
extend in any direction, especially in open field environments 
where trajectories are less constrained. Y et gain and need in the 
model both favor important locations like reward sites. Empirically, 
sequential replay in open environments is also biased toward these 
locations
15,30. We simulate navigation in an open field (Fig. 1c) and 
examine these content biases by calculating the activation probabil-
ity of a backup occurring at each location. Visualized over space 
(Fig. 4c), backups tend to concentrate near the reward (goal) loca
-
tions, in line with rodent recordings 15,31. Quantified as a function 
of distance (Fig. 4d), backups are again more likely than chance to 
happen near the reward or the agent
15,32.
Results like these have been taken to reflect replay’s involve -
ment in planning future routes. Indeed, the bias toward locations 
near the goal is seen even for forward replay considered separately, 
suggesting that it cannot simply reflect initiation bias (because our 
simulations randomize starting locations; Supplementary Fig. 3). 
Locations at the final turn toward the reward are emphasized even 
more than locations nearer the reward itself, a consequence of the 
gain term being higher where there is a greater effect on behavior. 
The over-representation of turning points is a consequence of the 
barriers in the simulated environment and is consistent with reports 
that reactivated place fields congregate around relevant cues
33.
The hypothesized involvement of replay (both forward and 
reverse) in evaluating potential routes can also be assessed by com-
paring replayed trajectories to recent or future paths. In the model, 
these tend to coincide, because backups tend to occur in locations 
favored by the need term and, for forward trajectories, by the defi
-
nition of valid n-step sampling, which measures rewards expected 
along the agent’s predicted future trajectory. However, the corre
-
spondence is not perfect; in fact, backups can sometimes construct 
trajectories not previously traversed continuously by the agent
18. 
(Although our model as implemented only replays individual tran-
sitions that have previously been made in real experience, these can 
be recombined, and the same framework would work equally with 
transitions whose availability and future need can be inferred, as by 
vision.) We measured the probability that the first five backups of a 
forward or reverse event would include locations visited by the agent 
ab
ed
g
j
c
h
i
f
k
l
StartE ndStart End
01
Need
StartE ndStart End
0 101
01
Need
0
1
State value
Gain
0
1
State value
Gain
0
1
State value
Gain
Time
0
1
State value
Gain
TimeTime
Time
Reverse replay Forward replay
Fig. 2 | r eplay produces extended trajectories in forward and reverse directions. a–f, Example of reverse replay. g–l, Example of forward replay. (a,d) Gain 
term and state values. Note that the gain term is specific for each action (triangles) and that it may change after each backup due to its dependence on 
the current state values. Replay of the last action executed before finding an unexpected reward often has positive gain because the corresponding backup 
will make the agent more likely to repeat that action in the future. Once this backup is executed, the value of the preceding state is updated and replaying 
actions leading to this updated state will have a positive gain. Repeated iterations of this procedure lead to a pattern of replay that extends in the reverse 
direction. The highlighted triangle indicates the action selected for value updating. (g,j) If gain differences are smaller than need differences, the need term 
dominates and sequences will tend to extend in the forward direction. (b,e,h,k) Need term. Note that the need term is specific for each state and does  
not change after each backup, as it is fully determined by the current state of the agent. The need term prioritizes backups near the agent and extends 
forward through states the agent is expected to visit in the future. In the field, the need term is also responsible for sequences expanding in a depth-first 
manner as opposed to breadth-first. (c,f) Example reverse sequences obtained on the linear track (c) and open field (f). (i,l) Example forward  
sequences obtained on the linear track (i) and open field (l). Note that forward sequences tend to follow the agent’s previous behavior but may also  
find new paths towards the goal.
a
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Number of events per episode
b
Forward
replay
Forward
replay
Diba & Buzsáki (2007)Model
Before run
After run
Reverse
replay
Reverse
replay
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
Number of events 
Before run
After run
Fig. 3 | Forward and reverse sequences happen at different times and are 
modulated asymmetrically by reward. a, Forward sequences tend to take 
place before the onset of a run, while reverse sequences tend to take place 
after the completion of a run, upon receipt of reward. b, Data from Diba & 
Buzsáki
14 (their Fig. 1c) showing that the majority (841 of 887) of forward 
sequences occurred at the start end of the track before running, while the 
majority (395 of 464) of reverse sequences occurred at the other end 
following the run
14. Image in b adapted from ref. 14, Nature Publishing Group.
Nature NeuroscieNce | www.nature.com/ natureneuroscience

===== PAGE 5 =====
ArticlesNaTUre NeUrOscieNce
in the future or past. In the open field, forward replay correlates with 
the agent’s future trajectory much more than with its past (Fig. 4e).  
In contrast, reverse replay shows the opposite pattern (Fig. 4f ).  
The similarity between replayed trajectories and the trajectories  
followed by the agent in either the past (reverse replay) or future 
(forward replay) is again in line with rodent recordings
15,33.
Last, we address remote replay, in which sequences correspond 
to spatial locations away from the animal 17 or in remote environ -
ments21. Even during sleep (when replay rarely corresponds to the 
location where the animal is sleeping) replay tends to represent 
rewarding areas of the environment, in comparison to similar but 
unrewarding areas
31. In our model, biases in reactivation during rest 
can again be understood in terms of the same need- and gain-based 
prioritization (with need defined as subsequently expected future 
occupancy following waking). We test these predictions of sleep 
replay by simulating a T-maze with a reward placed at the end of 
one of the two arms (Fig. 4g), with the agent absent from the envi
-
ronment (see Methods). The proportion of backups corresponding 
to actions leading to the rewarded arm is much greater than the pro
-
portion of backups corresponding to actions leading to the unre -
warded arm (Fig. 4h), reproducing equivalent empirical results31.
Asymmetric effect of prediction errors. We have shown that prior-
itized memory access for action evaluation applied in different con-
ditions may give rise to forward and reverse sequences. However, 
our claim that both sorts of replay may arise from the same pri
-
oritized operation may seem at odds with the general view that for-
ward and reverse sequences have distinct functions (for example, 
planning and learning, respectively
14,19). One observation that has 
been argued to support this distinction is that reverse and forward 
replay are differently sensitive to reward context. In rodents navi
-
gating a linear track, the rate of reverse replay increases when the 
animal encounters an increased reward, but decreases when the ani
-
mal encounters a decreased reward. In contrast, the rate of forward 
replay is similar despite either change in reward
19,33.
Our hypothesis is instead that planning and learning are bet -
ter understood as different variants of the same operation: using 
backups (in different orders) to propagate reward information over 
space and time. In our model, asymmetric effects of increases versus 
decreases in reward are a hallmark of the gain term, arising from its 
definition in terms of policy change (Fig. 1e,f ) and distinguishing 
our prioritization hypothesis from others that simply trigger update 
on any surprise
27–29).
Because gain is accrued when an update changes the agent’s 
choice toward a better one, it depends both on whether the news is 
good or bad and on what alternative actions are available (Fig. 1e,f).  
Figure 5a,b demonstrates this predicted interaction by plotting 
gains for different types of feedback about the action previously 
believed to be better (Fig. 5a) or worse (Fig. 5b) in a two-action 
situation. Gain is large for learning that the seemingly worse action 
is actually better than the alternative or that the seemingly better 
action is worse—either result teaches the agent a better choice. 
There is a second, subtler asymmetry when (as, in our model, due 
to ‘softmax’ choice) how reliably an action is executed depends on 
its relative advantage over alternatives. Learning that the best action 
is even more rewarding makes the agent more likely than previously 
to choose it, so there is small positive gain; learning it is somewhat 
worse (but still the best option) carries zero or negative gain since it 
ab
Davidson et al. (2009)
Distance between agent
and replay start (m)
Count
20
40
0
0–5–10 51 0
Probability
0.5
1.0
0
0–5–10 51 0
Distance between agent and
replay start (number of states)
Model
ef ghForward replay Reverse replay
01 5
Fraction
0
01 5
0.5
d Distance
to agent
Distance Distance
Distance
to rewardActivation probability
c
0 0.5
Fraction of sequences
including state
1
–10 01 0
Number of
steps in past (or future)
0
Number of
steps in past (or future)
–10 0
0
1 Ólafsdóttir
et al (2015)
50
0
CuedUncued
Proportion
of events (%)
10
0
CuedUncued
Model
10
Fig. 4 | r eplay over-represents agent and reward locations and predicts subsequent and past behavior. a, Distribution of start locations of significant 
replay events relative to the agent’s position and heading on the linear track. Negative distances indicate that the replayed trajectory starts behind the agent. 
Most significant replay events on the linear track start at or immediately behind the agent’s location. b, Data from Davidson et al.17 (their Fig. 3f), showing 
the distribution of start locations of replay trajectories relative to the animal’s position and heading on the track (n =  136 cells; four rats)17. c, Activation 
probability across all backups within an episode. Colors represent the probability of a backup happening at each location within a given episode. Note that 
backups are more likely to occur in locations near the reward. d, Probability that a given backup happens at various distances from the agent (left) and from 
the reward (right) in the open field. Dotted lines represent chance levels. Note that backups are substantially more likely to happen near the agent and/
or near the reward than chance. e,f, How forward and reverse replay predict future and previous steps in the open field. Lines indicate the probability that 
the first five backups of any significant forward or reverse sequence contains the state the agent will occupy or has occupied a given number of steps in the 
future or past, respectively. Dotted lines represent chance levels. Note that forward replay is more likely to represent future states than past states, while 
the opposite is true for reverse replay. g, We simulated an agent in an offline setting (for example, sleep) after exploring a T-maze and receiving a reward 
on the right (cued) arm. h, Left: the proportion of backups corresponding to actions leading to the cued arm (orange) is much greater than the proportion 
of backups corresponding to actions leading to the uncued arm (gray). Right: data replotted from Ólafsdóttir et al.
31 (their Fig. 2d), showing the proportion 
of spiking events categorized as ‘preplay’ events for the cued and uncued arms (n =  212 cells; four rats). The dashed line indicates the proportion of events 
expected by chance31. Image in b adapted from ref. 17, Elsevier; image in h adapted from ref. 31 under a Creative Commons license CC BY 4.0.
Nature NeuroscieNce | www.nature.com/ natureneuroscience

===== PAGE 6 =====
Articles NaTUre NeUrOscieNce
makes choice sloppier. All these effects arise only for reverse replay 
occurring at the end of a run, when the gain term is large and, there-
fore, dominates the utility of the backup.
We investigate the asymmetric effects of positive or negative pre-
diction errors on replay by simulating two conditions on a linear 
track task similar to that studied by Ambrose et al.
19: (i) an increased 
reward condition in which the reward encountered by the agent is 
four times larger in half of the episodes, and (ii) a decreased reward 
condition in which the reward encountered by the agent is zero in 
half of the episodes. The number of forward events is approximately 
equal in all cases. In contrast, the number of reverse events is larger 
upon receiving a larger reward than upon receiving a conventional 
reward (Fig. 5c,d). This effect is driven by both an increase in 
reverse replay for larger rewards and a decrease for conventional 
(1× ) rewards (Supplementary Fig. 4), as observed experimentally
19. 
In contrast, the number of reverse events is smaller upon receiving 
no reward than upon receiving a conventional reward (Fig. 5e,f ). 
 
This effect is driven by a decrease in reverse replay when the 
reward is 0 and by an increase when the reward is conventional (1×  
Supplementary Fig. 4), again replicating empirical findings19.
Another crucial prediction of the model is that propagating neg-
ative prediction error is unhelpful if no better action is available, 
but advantageous if alternative actions become preferred. Above, 
reduced reward produces no replay because no better option is 
available. In contrast, if negative reward (for example, electric 
shock) is encountered, propagating it has positive gain (Fig. 5a), 
as it enables omitting the action altogether. Staying still or moving 
backwards is better than moving toward a shock zone. Indeed, in 
simulation, backup occurs at the shock zone after shock delivery (to 
propagate this information and prevent the agent’s return), but not 
prior to shock delivery (Fig. 5g). This prediction has also been con
-
firmed: in a conditioned place avoidance task, replays are observed 
extending from the animal’s position toward the end of a track pre
-
viously paired with shock, despite the fact that the animals does not 
then enter the shock zone
34 (Fig. 5h). These results not only provide 
direct support to our theory’s notion of gain but also illustrate how 
the notion of planning embodied by our model differs from a nar
-
rower, colloquial sense of planning. Evaluating candidate actions by 
simulation does not just find paths to goals, it also helps agents fig
-
ure out what not to do.
Effects of familiarity and specific experiences. As a learning model, 
our theory also predicts effects of experience on the prevalence and 
location of replay. In particular, change in the need versus gain terms 
predicts countervailing effects of experience. As a task is learned, 
prediction errors decrease, policies stabilize, and the gain expected 
due to replay decreases, causing a reduction in significant replay 
Ambrose et al (2016)
Ambrose et al (2016)
200
100
0
Percent difference
100
–100
0
P < 0.05 
P < 0.01
Gain
term
[1,0] /uni2192[Qnew,0] [1,0] /uni2192[1,Qnew]
Qnew Qnew–1.0 0.5
ab
cd
e
gh
f
3.0 –2.0 0.5 2.0
Model
100
–100
0
Percent differencePercent difference
Percent difference
2,000
1,000
0
1×
1×
4×
1×
Forward
replay
Reverse
replay
Model
Forward
replay
Reverse
replay
Forward
replay
Reverse
replay
Forward
replay
Reverse
replay
1×
1×
4×
1×
1×
1×
4×
1×
1×
1×
4×
1×
1×
1×
0×
1×
1×
1×
0×
1×
1×
1×
0×
1×
1×
1×
0×
1×
Before shockAfter shock
Activation probability
of aversive zone0
0.5
1
Model
0
0.5
Before shockAfter shock
1
Wu et al (2017)
P < 0.001 n.s.
n.s.
Fig. 5 | Forward and reverse sequences happen at different times and are 
modulated asymmetrically by reward. a, Gain term for an example case in 
which two actions are available and the agent learns a new value (Q
new) for 
the best action. b, Gain term for an example case in which two actions are 
available and the agent learns a new value (Q
new) for the worst action.  
c, We simulated a task in which, in half of the episodes, the reward received 
was 4×  larger than baseline. Left: the number of forward events was 
approximately equal in every lap, both when the rewards were equal (gray 
bar) and when the rewards were 4×  larger (red bar). Right: in contrast, 
the number of reverse events was approximately equal when the rewards 
were equal (gray bar), but much larger upon receiving a larger reward 
in the unequal reward condition (red bar). d, Data from Ambrose et al.
19 
(their Fig. 3e,h) showing percent difference in replay rate from unchanged 
to increased reward at end of track in the equal (gray bars) and unequal 
(red bars) reward conditions (n =  maximum of 467 stopping periods in the 
equal reward condition and 217 in the unequal reward condition; five rats; 
mean ±  95% confidence interval; significance assessed with Wald's z test). 
Note that in forward replay (left), the effects on the two ends of the track 
are not significantly different (n.s.)
19. e, We simulate a task in which, in half 
of the episodes, the reward received was zero. Left: the number of forward 
events was approximately equal in every lap both when the rewards were 
equal (gray bar), as well as when the rewards were removed (blue bar). 
Right: in contrast, the number of reverse events was approximately equal 
when the rewards were equal (gray bar), but almost completely abolished 
upon receiving no reward in the unequal reward condition (blue bar).  
f, Data replotted from Ambrose et al.
19 (their Fig. 5c,f) showing percent 
difference in replay rate from unchanged to decreased reward at end of 
track in the equal (gray bars) and unequal (blue bars) reward conditions 
(n =  maximum of 580 stopping periods in the equal reward condition and 
230 stopping periods in the unequal reward condition; five rats; mean ±  
95% confidence interval; significance assessed with a Wald’s z test). Note 
that in forward replay (left), the effects on the two ends of the track are 
not significantly different (n.s.)
19. g, Activation probability at the end of a 
linear track during random exploration without rewards or punishments 
(left) and after shock delivery at the end of a track (right). Dots represent 
mean activation probability across simulations. h, Data from Wu et al.
34 
(their Fig. 3e) showing the activation probability during population burst 
events of cells with place fields at a light zone before shock delivery (left) 
and similarly for cells with place fields at a shock zone after shock delivery 
(right; n =  30 cells with place fields at a light zone; n =  26 cells with place 
fields at a shock zone; four rats; horizontal lines in box plots are the median 
and the 25% and 75% range values; whiskers indicate the most extreme 
data points ≤ 1 interquartile range from box edges; significance assessed 
with a two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test
34). Images in d,f adapted from 
ref. 19, Elsevier; image in h adapted from ref. 34, Nature Publishing Group.
Nature NeuroscieNce | www.nature.com/ natureneuroscience

===== PAGE 7 =====
ArticlesNaTUre NeUrOscieNce
events. At the same time, as behavior crystallizes, need becomes more 
focused along the routes learned by the agent (for example, compare 
top and bottom of Fig. 1g). This predicts that, conditional on replay 
occurring, particular states are increasingly likely to participate.
These countervailing effects may help to explain apparent incon
-
sistencies in the replay literature, as both increases and decreases in 
replay have been reported, albeit using a range of dependent mea -
sures and designs 16,32,33,35–37. Specifically, the more time an animal 
spends between two place fields, the more the corresponding place 
cell pair is reactivated during sleep. This is consistent with focusing 
need on these states
35. In contrast, replay is more easily observed in 
novel than in familiar tracks (consistent with a decrease in gain over-
all16), and the average activation probability is highest in novel envi-
ronments36. It has been suggested that replay tends to increase within 
a session with exposure, but decrease across sessions as the animal 
becomes familiar with a novel environment 37. This may reflect the 
additional effect of experience versus computation on learning in 
our model. In particular, both need (favoring focused replay) and 
gain (opposing overall replay) are affected by actual experience in an 
environment, but only gain is affected by replay (for example, during 
rest between sessions). This is because only experience can teach an 
agent about the situations it is likely to encounter (i.e., need), but 
value-learning from replayed experience reduces subsequent gain.
We examine the effect of familiarity and specific experience on 
replay by calculating the number of significant replay events as a 
function of experience (episode number). In line with previous 
reports
16, we observe that the number of significant events decays 
steadily with experience. This effect is due to a decrease in both 
forward and reverse replay. Similarly, activation probability decay 
steadily with experience (Fig. 6a), in line with empirical findings 
(Fig. 6b)36, and this decay occurs for both forward and reverse 
sequences (Fig. 6a). In contrast, when events occur, the probabil -
ity that they include a specific state increases with number of visits 
(Fig. 6c), also in line with previous reports (Fig. 6d)
35. These two 
effects reflect the effect of experience on the two terms governing 
priority: while the gain term decreases with exposure, the need term 
increases as the agent’s trajectory becomes more predictable.
Effect of replay on choice behavior. The preceding simulations 
demonstrate that a range of properties of place cell replay can be 
predicted if replay is optimized for planning involving the reacti
-
vated locations. This implies a complementary set of behavioral pre-
dictions about how replay’s involvement guides choices. Behavioral 
effects are most characteristically expected for acquiring tasks (like 
shortcuts) that exercise the ability of replay to compose novel tra
-
jectories from separate experiences 3 and that cannot be solved by 
simple model-free learning from experience.
Hippocampal replay can follow novel paths or shortcuts18, though 
there is less direct evidence for its behavioral consequences. In one 
report
31, activation of a path not yet explored was followed by rats sub-
sequently being able to choose that path, correctly, over another, consis-
tent with planning. Forward hippocampal replay predicts future paths 
even when the goal location is novel
15. Finally, blocking sharp wave 
ripples selectively impairs learning and performance of a spatial work-
ing memory task24. Though our model would require elaboration to 
simulate that task (because it is non-Markovian), it demonstrates that 
awake replay is required for associating events over space and time
24.
Our theory also emphasizes that several different patterns of 
replay (Fig. 1a) can solve decision tasks requiring integrating multi-
ple experiences, which have largely been assumed to reflect forward 
planning at choice time. Apart from forward replay, reverse replay 
allows connecting an experienced outcome with potential prede
-
cessor actions, and offline replay can compose sequences of expe -
riences during rest. Although these behavioral consequences have 
not been examined in hippocampal spatial research, research with 
humans using nonspatial versions of revaluation tasks (and activ
-
ity of category-specific regions of visual cortex to index state rein -
statement) verifies that forward replay5, reverse replay9, and offline 
replay11 all predict subjects’ ability to solve these tasks. The present 
theory’s account of which replay events are prioritized might pro -
vide a basis for explaining why different task variants in different 
studies have evoked different solution strategies.
Discussion
Given all the experience accumulated in a lifetime, which memories 
should one access to plan the most rewarding decisions? We offer 
a rational account for the prioritization of memory access to sup
-
port action evaluation. We propose that various nonlocal place cell 
phenomena reflect a single evaluation operation, which has vary
-
ing utility in different circumstances. This utility, derived from first 
principles, amounts to the product of two terms, gain and need. 
Simulations qualitatively reproduced a range of results about hip
-
pocampal replay without parameter fitting.
This theory draws new connections between hippocampus and 
decision-making, with implications for both areas. It has long been 
recognized that place cell activity (including forward and reverse 
replay) likely supports choice13,16; we render this idea experimentally 
testable by specifying a hypothesis about what the brain learns from 
any particular replay event.
05 10 15 20
Number of visits within an episode
Change in SWR cofiring
postsleep relative to presleep (r) Activation probability
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0
0
0.02
–0.02
0.04
0.06
0.2
0
0.4
1234 5
Time in cofiring field (min)
Day 1
Novel
Familiar
Cheng & Frank (2008)
O’Neill et al (2008)Model
Model
Day 2D ay 301 02 04 030 50
Episode
0.5
ab
cd
Forward
Reverse
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Novel arm
Familiar arm
Activation probabilityActivation probability
P < 0.001
P < 0.001 
Fig. 6 | r eplay frequency decays with familiarity and increases with 
experience. a, On the linear track, the probability of significant replay 
events happening at any given state decays across episodes, peaking when 
the environment is novel. Insets: the activation probability of both forward 
(top) and reverse (bottom) replay events decays with experience. b, Data 
replotted from Cheng & Frank
36 (their Fig. 4a), showing the activation 
probability per high-frequency event (n =  41, 43, 34, 34, 31, 28 cells, 
respectively, for each bar; four rats; error bars represent standard errors; 
significance assessed with a Wilcoxon rank-sum test)
36. c, Probability that 
significant replay events include a state on the linear track as a function of 
the number of visits to that state in an episode. Analogously to the effect 
reported in Fig. 1g, driven by the need term, the probability that at state will 
be replayed increases with experience in that state. d, Data replotted from 
O’Neil et al.
35 (their Fig. 3c), showing that the more time rats spend in the 
cofiring field during exploration, the larger is the increase in probability that 
these cell pairs fire together during sleep sharp wave ripples (n =  613 cells 
and 19,054 cell pairs recorded over 33 sessions in the novel environment; 
n =  309 cells and 4,865 cell pairs recorded over 15 sessions in the familiar 
conditions; 14 rats; error bars represent standard errors)
35. Image in b 
adapted from ref. 36, Elsevier; image in d adapted from ref. 35, Nature 
Publishing Group. 
Nature NeuroscieNce | www.nature.com/ natureneuroscience

===== PAGE 8 =====
Articles NaTUre NeUrOscieNce
Hippocampal researchers typically envision that replay serves 
disjoint functions in different circumstances, including learning 16, 
planning13–15,38, spatial memory retrieval 24, and consolidation 23,25. 
By focusing on a specific operation (long-run value computation), 
we sharpen these suggestions and expose their relationships. In RL, 
learning amounts to propagating value between adjacent states for 
temporal credit assignment. This perspective unifies the proposed 
role of forward replay in planning with that of reverse replay in 
learning (both linking sequences to their outcome
16), and it attri -
butes a similar role to offline replay. Though serving a common goal, 
these patterns are appropriate in different circumstances, explain
-
ing differential regulation (such as asymmetric effects of predic -
tion errors on forward versus reverse replay), which has previously 
been taken as evidence for distinct functions
19. As for consolida -
tion, our perspective echoes other work 25 in viewing it not merely 
as strengthening existing memories, but as more actively computing 
new summaries from the replayed content. As with other systems 
consolidation theories, the summaries (here value) are likely stored 
elsewhere in the brain (here corticostriatal synapses), and replay 
presumably evokes coordinated activity throughout the brain, espe
-
cially the dopaminergic–striatal reward networks39,40.
While we explore a specific role for replay in computing long-run 
action value, we do not exclude other computations over replayed 
experiences25. One variant of our theory uses replay to learn a succes-
sor representation (SR): a model of the long-run locations expected 
to follow some action, instead of the reward consequences alone. 
The SR can be used as an intermediate representation for comput
-
ing action values41 and has been proposed to be learned within hip-
pocampal recurrents42. Like value, it can be learned from replayed 
experience43, connecting learning from replay more directly with 
building a type of cognitive map18. Our account extends fully to this 
case. Indeed, our prioritization computation is the same whether 
replay updates an SR or action values, because an SR update has the 
same utility (under our myopic approximation) as the correspond
-
ing action value update: both implement the same Bellman backup.
A key insight in decision neuroscience is that how decision vari-
ables are computed governs what is ultimately chosen. Thus, the 
view that the brain contains separate systems for ‘model-based’ vs. 
‘model-free’ value computation (which differ in whether they recom
-
pute values at decision time) may explain phenomena such as habits 
and compulsion. We extend this to a more granular view, addressing 
which branches are considered during recomputation
44. Dysfunction 
in such selection may explain symptoms involving biased (for exam-
ple, craving or obsession) and abnormal patterns of thought (for 
example, rumination or hallucination). Our theory goes beyond 
planning about the immediate future to consider value computation 
at remote states: offline replay
22,26. This systematizes several instances 
in which tasks thought to index model-based planning at choice time 
are instead apparently solved by computations occurring earlier9–11, 
and it links them (hypothetically) to different patterns of replay. 
Finally, reinterpreting planning as learning from remembered expe
-
rience suggests that this operation might be subserved by the same 
dopaminergic machinery as learning from direct experience, but 
driving it with replayed experiences instead. Indeed, trajectory replay 
in the hippocampus drives activation and plasticity throughout this 
system
39,40. Such shared machinery would explain the otherwise puz-
zling involvement of dopamine in model-based evaluation45–48.
The artificial intelligence literature suggests one alternative 
approach for prioritizing backups: prioritized sweeping (PS) 27–29. 
PS triggers backups on large prediction errors (whether negative 
or positive) to propagate unexpected information to predecessor 
states. Our approach adds the need term, to focus backups on states 
likely to be visited again. Also, our gain term considers the effect 
of a backup on an agent’s policy, propagating information only 
when it has behavioral consequences. Data support both features 
of our model over PS. Positive and negative prediction errors have 
 
asymmetric effects, consistent with gain but not with PS19 (Fig. 5c–f).  
Due to need, our model also searches forward from the current 
state, in addition to PS’s largely backward propagation. The need 
term also channels activity along recently or frequently observed 
trajectories. This may help to explain why nonlocal place cell activ
-
ity follows extended sequences even though straightforward error 
propagation is often more breadth-first27,28.
Our model has a number of limitations, which are opportuni -
ties for future work. We omit many model features to construct 
the simplest instantiation that exposes the key intuition behind 
the theory: the roles of gain and need driving reverse and forward 
replay, respectively. For instance, we restrict our simulations to 
simple spatial environments, though the framework applies gener
-
ally to sequential tasks. Because these environments are stationary 
and deterministic, we omit uncertainty from the model. Both sto
-
chasticity and nonstationarity would give rise to uncertainty about 
action values, which would be crucial to a fuller account of priori
-
tized deliberation. This will require, in future, re-introducing these 
features from previous accounts of online deliberation
6,7; with these 
features restored, the current theory should inherit its predecessors’ 
account of habits, such as how they arise with overtraining.
The most important limitation of our work is that, to investigate 
the decision theoretic considerations governing replay, we define 
priority abstractly and do not offer a mechanism for how the brain 
would realistically compute it. Although the need term is straight
-
forward (it is the SR 41, which the brain has been proposed to track 
for other reasons42,49), the calculation of gain, as we define it, requires 
that the agent knows the effect of a backup on its policy prior to 
deciding whether to perform it. We use this admittedly unrealis
-
tic rule to investigate the characteristics of efficient backup, but a 
process-level model will require heuristics or approximations to the 
gain term, whose form might be motivated by our simulations.
To highlight the role of sequencing computations, we construct 
the theory at a single spatial and temporal scale, with a Bellman 
backup as the elementary unit of computation. We build both for
-
ward and reverse replay trajectories recursively, step by step. We 
note that research in both hippocampus and decision-making (sep
-
arately) stress the multiscale nature of task representations. A fuller 
account of planning would include temporally extended actions 
(‘options’)
44,50 or similarly extended state predictions 41. In this case, 
the principles of prioritization would carry over directly, but over a 
set of extended trajectories rather than individual locations.
The key experimental opportunities suggested by our theory 
involve monitoring or manipulating nonlocal place cell activity dur
-
ing trial-by-trial RL tasks, especially those that defeat alternative, 
model-free mechanisms
5,45. Fundamentally, the theory predicts a 
series of relationships spanning experience to choice: the statistics of 
experience (via need and gain) influence the likelihood of particular 
trajectories replaying; these events update action values (and their 
neural signatures, as in striatum) at the replayed locations; finally, 
this impacts choice behavior. Each of these associations could be 
monitored or intervened upon. Furthermore, they are all detailed 
event-by-event, so (for instance) we predict not just that replay pro
-
motes better integrative learning overall, but which computation is 
subserved by any particular nonlocal event. Thus, conditional on 
an event (or interrupting one), the theory predicts specific, local
-
ized changes in neural value representations and choice behavior. 
Similarly, by manipulating experience to affect need or gain, the 
theory predicts that one can affect not just whether forward or 
reverse replay is favored, but on which trajectories.
online content
Any methods, additional references, Nature Research Reporting 
Summaries, source data, statements of data availability and asso -
ciated accession codes are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41593-018-0232-z.
Nature NeuroscieNce | www.nature.com/ natureneuroscience

===== PAGE 9 =====
ArticlesNaTUre NeUrOscieNce
Received: 9 January 2018; Accepted: 17 August 2018;  
Published: xx xx xxxx
r eferences
 1. Sutton, R. S. & Barto, A. G. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction (MIT 
Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 1998).
 2. Daw, N. D. & Dayan, P . The algorithmic anatomy of model-based evaluation. 
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 369, 20130478 (2014).
 3. Shohamy, D. & Daw, N. D. Integrating memories to guide decisions. Curr. 
Opin. Behav. Sci. 5, 85–90 (2015).
 4. Huys, Q. J. et al. Interplay of approximate planning strategies. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA 112, 3098–3103 (2015).
 5. Doll, B. B., Duncan, K. D., Simon, D. A., Shohamy, D. & Daw, N. D. 
Model-based choices involve prospective neural activity. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 
767–772 (2015).
 6. Daw, N. D., Niv, Y . & Dayan, P . Uncertainty-based competition between 
prefrontal and dorsolateral striatal systems for behavioral control. Nat. 
Neurosci. 8, 1704–1711 (2005).
 7. Keramati, M., Dezfouli, A. & Piray, P . Speed/accuracy trade-off between  
the habitual and the goal-directed processes. PLoS Comput. Biol. 7,  
e1002055 (2011).
 8. Gillan, C. M., Kosinski, M., Whelan, R., Phelps, E. A. & Daw, N. D. 
Characterizing a psychiatric symptom dimension related to deficits in 
goal-directed control. eLife 5, e11305 (2016).
 9. Wimmer, G. E. & Shohamy, D. Preference by association: how memory 
mechanisms in the hippocampus bias decisions. Science  338, 270–273 (2012).
 10. Gershman, S. J., Markman, A. B. & Otto, A. R. Retrospective revaluation  
in sequential decision making: A tale of two systems. J. Exp. Psychol. 143,  
182 (2014).
 11. Momennejad, I., Otto, A. R., Daw, N. D. & Norman, K. A. Offline replay 
supports planning: fMRI evidence from reward revaluation. Preprint at 
bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/196758 (2017).
 12. O’Keefe, J. & Nadel, L. The Hippocampus as a Cognitive Map (Clarendon 
Press, Oxford, 1978)..
 13. Johnson, A. & Redish, A. D. Neural ensembles in CA3 transiently  
encode paths forward of the animal at a decision point. J. Neurosci. 27, 
12176–12189 (2007).
 14. Diba, K. & Buzsáki, G. Forward and reverse hippocampal place-cell 
sequences during ripples. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 1241 (2007).
 15. Pfeiffer, B. E. & Foster, D. J. Hippocampal place-cell sequences depict future 
paths to remembered goals. Nature  497, 74–79 (2013).
 16. Foster, D. J. & Wilson, M. A. Reverse replay of behavioural sequences in 
hippocampal place cells during the awake state. Nature  440, 680–683 (2006).
 17. Davidson, T. J., Kloosterman, F . & Wilson, M. A. Hippocampal replay of 
extended experience. Neuron 63, 497–507 (2009).
 18. Gupta, A. S., van der Meer, M. A., Touretzky, D. S. & Redish, A. D. 
Hippocampal replay is not a simple function of experience. Neuron  65, 
695–705 (2010).
 19. Ambrose, R. E., Pfeiffer, B. E. & Foster, D. J. Reverse replay of hippocampal place 
cells is uniquely modulated by changing reward. Neuron 91, 1124–1136 (2016).
 20. Lee, A. K. & Wilson, M. A. Memory of sequential experience in the 
hippocampus during slow wave sleep. Neuron  36, 1183–1194 (2002).
 21. Karlsson, M. P . & Frank, L. M. Awake replay of remote experiences in the 
hippocampus. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 913–918 (2009).
 22. Johnson, A. & Redish, A. D. Hippocampal replay contributes to within 
session learning in a temporal difference reinforcement learning model. 
Neural Netw. 18, 1163–1171 (2005).
 23. Carr, M. F ., Jadhav, S. P . & Frank, L. M. Hippocampal replay in the awake 
state: a potential substrate for memory consolidation and retrieval. Nat. 
Neurosci. 14, 147–153 (2011).
 24. Jadhav, S. P ., Kemere, C., German, P . W . & Frank, L. M. Awake hippocampal 
sharp-wave ripples support spatial memory. Science  336, 1454–1458 (2012).
 25. McClelland, J. L., McNaughton, B. L. & O'Reilly, R. C. Why there are 
complementary learning systems in the hippocampus and neocortex: insights 
from the successes and failures of connectionist models of learning and 
memory. Psychol. Rev. 102, 419 (1995).
 26. Sutton, R. S. Integrated architectures for learning, planning, and reacting 
based on approximating dynamic programming. Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. 
7, 216–224 (1990).
 27. Moore, A. W . & Atkeson, C. G. Prioritized sweeping: reinforcement learning 
with less data and less time. Mach. Learn. 13, 103–130 (1993).
 28. Peng, J. & Williams, R. J. Efficient learning and planning within the Dyna 
framework. Adapt. Behav. 1, 437–454 (1993).
 29. Schaul, T., Quan, J., Antonoglou, I. & Silver, D. Prioritized experience replay. 
Preprint at arXiv 1511.05952 (2015).
 30. Dupret, D., O'Neill, J., Pleydell-Bouverie, B. & Csicsvari, J. The reorganization 
and reactivation of hippocampal maps predict spatial memory performance. 
Nat. Neurosci. 13, 995–1002 (2010).
 31. Ólafsdóttir, H. F ., Barry, C., Saleem, A. B., Hassabis, D. & Spiers, H. J. 
Hippocampal place cells construct reward related sequences through 
unexplored space. eLife 4, e06063 (2015).
 32. Jackson, J. C., Johnson, A. & Redish, A. D. Hippocampal sharp waves and 
reactivation during awake states depend on repeated sequential experience.  
J. Neurosci. 26, 12415–12426 (2006).
 33. Singer, A. C. & Frank, L. M. Rewarded outcomes enhance reactivation of 
experience in the hippocampus. Neuron  64, 910–921 (2009).
 34. Wu, C.-T., Haggerty, D., Kemere, C. & Ji, D. Hippocampal awake replay in 
fear memory retrieval. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 571 (2017).
 35. O’Neill, J., Senior, T. J., Allen, K., Huxter, J. R. & Csicsvari, J. Reactivation  
of experience-dependent cell assembly patterns in the hippocampus.  
Nat. Neurosci. 11, 209 (2008).
 36. Cheng, S. & Frank, L. M. New experiences enhance coordinated neural 
activity in the hippocampus. Neuron  57, 303–313 (2008).
 37. Buhry, L., Azizi, A. H. & Cheng, S. Reactivation, replay, and preplay: how it 
might all fit together. Neural Plast. 2011, 203462 (2011).
 38. Singer, A. C., Carr, M. F ., Karlsson , M. P . & Frank, L. M. Hippocampal SWR 
activity predicts correct decisions during the initial learning of an alternation 
task. Neuron 77, 1163–1173 (2013).
 39. Lansink, C. S., Goltstein, P . M., Lankelma, J. V ., McNaughton, B. L. & 
Pennartz, C. M. Hippocampus leads ventral striatum in replay of place-
reward information. PLoS Biol. 7, e1000173 (2009).
 40. Gomperts, S. N., Kloosterman, F . & Wilson, M. A. VTA neurons  
coordinate with the hippocampal reactivation of spatial experience. eLife  4, 
e05360 (2015).
 41. Dayan, P . Improving generalization for temporal difference learning: the 
successor representation. Neural Comput. 5, 613–624 (1993).
 42. Stachenfeld, K. L., Botvinick, M. M., & Gershman, S. J. The hippocampus as a 
predictive map. Nat. Neurosci., 20, 1643 (2017).
 43. Russek, E. M., Momennejad, I., Botvinick, M. M., Gershman, S. J., & Daw, N. 
D. Predictive representations can link model-based reinforcement learning to 
model-free mechanisms. PLoS Comput. Biol. 13, e1005768 (2017).
 44. Cushman, F . & Morris, A. Habitual control of goal selection in humans.  
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112, 13817–13822 (2015).
 45. Daw, N. D., Gershman, S. J., Seymour, B., Dayan, P . & Dolan, R. J. Model-
based influences on humans’ choices and striatal prediction errors. Neuron  
69, 1204–1215 (2011).
 46. Sadacca, B. F ., Jones, J. L. & Schoenbaum, G. Midbrain dopamine neurons 
compute inferred and cached value prediction errors in a common 
framework. eLife 5, e13665 (2016).
 47. Doll, B. B., Bath, K. G., Daw, N. D. & Frank, M. J. Variability in dopamine 
genes dissociates model-based and model-free reinforcement learning.  
J. Neurosci. 36, 1211–1222 (2016).
 48. Sharpe, M. J. et al. Dopamine transients are sufficient and necessary for 
acquisition of model-based associations. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 735–742 (2017).
 49. Momennejad, I. et al. The successor representation in human reinforcement 
learning. Nat. Hum. Behav. 1, 680 (2017).
 50. Botvinick, M. M., Niv, Y . & Barto, A. C. Hierarchically organized behavior 
and its neural foundations: a reinforcement learning perspective. Cognition  
113, 262–280 (2009).
a cknowledgments
We thank M. Lengyel, D. Shohamy, and D. Acosta-Kane for many helpful discussions, 
and we thank P .D. Rich for his comments on an earlier draft of the manuscript. We 
acknowledge support from NIDA through grant R01DA038891, part of the CRCNS 
program, and Google DeepMind. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors 
and does not necessarily represent the official views of any of the funding agencies.
a uthor contributions
Conceptualization, M.G.M. and N.D.D.; methodology, M.G.M. and N.D.D.; software, 
M.G.M.; simulations, M.G.M.; writing (original draft), M.G.M. and N.D.D.; writing 
(review & editing), M.G.M. and N.D.D.; funding acquisition, N.D.D.
c ompeting interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
a dditional information
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41593-018-0232-z.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.G.M.
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature America, Inc. 2018
Nature NeuroscieNce | www.nature.com/ natureneuroscience

===== PAGE 10 =====
Articles NaTUre NeUrOscieNce
Methods
Formal setting. We consider a class of sequential decision tasks in which an 
agent must decide in each situation (state; for example, a location in a spatial 
task) which action to perform with the goal of maximizing its expected future 
reward. The optimal course of action (policy) consists of selecting the actions with 
highest expected value. The value of an action (Q value) is defined as the expected 
discounted future reward from taking that action and following the optimal policy 
thereafter. Optimal decision-making, therefore, requires the agent to estimate 
action values as accurately as possible for maximizing total reward.
We address how best to order individual steps of computation, known as 
Bellman backups (Fig. 1b), for estimating an action’s value. A single Bellman 
backup updates the estimate of the future value of taking a particular target 
action in some state, by summing the immediate payoff received for the action 
with the estimated future value of the successor state that follows it. This backup 
operation is fundamental for predicting future reward in RL, because it propagates 
information about reward to states and actions that precede it. Bellman backups 
can be applied action-by-action during ongoing behavior to allow the agent to 
learn from experienced states and rewards; this corresponds the standard update 
rule for model-free temporal difference learning, as it is thought to be implemented 
in the brain by dopaminergic prediction errors
51. Our account includes this sort 
of learning from experienced events as a special case, but also allows performing 
additional Bellman backups to update estimates for target states and actions that 
are not currently being experienced (Fig. 1a,b). In these cases, the resulting reward 
and successor state are given by remembered or simulated experiences, but the 
learning rule is otherwise the same. In computer science, this approach is known as 
the Dyna framework
26. We refer to the information processed in a nonlocal backup 
as a ‘memory’—a target state and action, and the resulting reward and successor 
state. However, the same approach applies regardless of whether this information is 
a retrieved record of an individual event (like an episodic memory) or a simulated 
experience (a sample drawn from a learned ‘world model’ of the overall statistics 
of state transitions and rewards, more like a semantic memory). These two 
representations are largely the same in the present work because we simulate only 
fixed, deterministic tasks (Fig. 1c). Notably, because this process can compose 
behavioral sequences of simulated experience from pieces not experienced 
together, it can discover consequences missed by temporal difference learning, 
which evaluate actions only in terms of their directly experienced outcomes
1,51.
Stringing together multiple backup operations over a sequence of adjacent 
states and actions computes expected value over a trajectory. Thus, the value of an 
action—the expected cumulative discounted reward that will follow its execution—
can be sampled by adding up expected immediate rewards over a trajectory of one 
or more forward steps, plus any additional value expected forward from the last 
state considered. This is known as an n-step Bellman backup or a rollout, and can 
be composed from a series of one-step backups using a learning mechanism called 
eligibility traces
1. Similarly, value information can be propagated backwards along 
a trajectory (that is from a destination state to each of a series of predecessors) 
by chaining successive one-step backups in the reverse direction. Both of these 
patterns (forward and reverse value propagation) have precedents in different 
computer science methods (for example Monte Carlo tree search
52 and Prioritized 
sweeping27). Indeed, various existing model-based algorithms for computing values 
from a world model amount to a batch of many such backup operations performed 
in different orders
1,2. A major goal of our theory is to provide a principled account 
of when each pattern is most useful.
Model description. The framework of RL1 formalizes how an agent interacting 
with an environment through a sequence of states should select its actions to 
maximize some notion of cumulative reward. The agent’s policy π assigns a 
probability π(a|s) to each action A/uni2208a  in state S/uni2208s . Upon executing an action At 
at time t, the agent transitions from state St to state St + 1 and receives a reward Rt. 
The goal of the agent is to learn a policy that maximizes the discounted return Gt 
following time t, defined as
/uni2211/uni03B3/uni03B3 /uni03B3=+ ++ …=++
=
/uni221E
+GR RR R , (1)tt tt
i
i
ti1
2
2
0
where γ ∈  [0, 1] is the discount factor that determines the present value of future 
rewards.
The expected return obtained upon performing action a in state s and 
subsequently following policy π is denoted qπ(s, a) and is given by
E /uni2211/uni03B3=| == ./uni03C0 /uni03C0=
/uni221E
+qs aR Ss Aa(, )[ ,] (2)
i
i
ti tt
0
The policy that maximizes the expected return is the optimal policy and 
denoted q*. Following Q-learning53, the agent can learn an action-value function Q 
that approximates q* through iteratively performing Bellman backups:
A
/uni03B1/uni03B3/uni2190+ +−
/uni2208+QS AQ SA RQ Sa QS A(, )( ,) [m ax (, )( ,) ], (3)tt tt t a tt t1
where α ∈  [0, 1] is a learning-rate parameter. Bellman backups are performed 
automatically after each transition in real experience and may also be performed 
nonlocally during simulated experience, as in the Dyna architecture26.
The following framework provides a rational account for prioritizing Bellman 
backups according to the improvement in cumulative reward expected to result. 
Let the agent be in state S
t =  s at time t. We represent an experience ek by the 
4-tuple = /uni2032es ar s(, ,, )kk kk k , and we consider that accessing experience ek amounts to a 
Bellman backup which updates Q(sk,ak) with the target value A/uni03B3+ /uni2032/uni2208r Qs amax( ,)ka k .  
We also denote by πold the current (old) policy, prior to executing the backup and 
by πnew the resulting (new) policy after the backup.
The utility of accessing experience ek to update the value of Q(sk, ak), or the 
expected value of backup (EVB), is denoted by EVB(sk, ak) and is defined as
EE/uni2211/uni2211/uni03B3/uni03B3=| =− |=
/uni03C0/uni03C0=
/uni221E
+
=
/uni221E
+EVBs aR Ss RS s(, )[ ][ ], (4)kk
i
i
ti t
i
i
ti t
00newo ld
that is, EVB is the improvement in expected return due to a policy change. A 
key point about this definition is that although it sums rewards over all future 
timesteps, it can be rewritten in terms of a sum over expected visits to the updated 
state, sk (the full derivation is given below.) This is because accessing ek can only 
affect the policy in state sk (that is, πnew and πold differ only in state sk); and we can 
then separately consider the gain accrued each time the agent visits state sk and the 
expected number of times sk will be visited. In other words, by conditioning EVB(sk, 
ak) on St =  sk, this expression can be separated into the product of two terms: 
EVB(sk, ak) =  Gain(sk, ak) ×  Need(sk).
Gain term. The gain term quantifies the expected improvement in return accrued 
at the target state, s
k:
AA
/uni2211/uni2211/uni03C0/uni03C0=| −|/uni03C0/uni03C0
/uni2208/uni2208
Gain sa Qs aa sQ sa as(, )( ,) () (, )() , (5)kk
a
kk
a
kknewo ldnewn ew
where πnew(a|sk) represents the probability of selecting action a in state sk after the 
Bellman backup, and πold(a|sk) is the same quantity before the Bellman backup.
Need term. The need term measures the discounted number of times the agent is 
expected to visit the target state, a proxy for the current relevance of each state:
/uni2211/uni03B3/uni03B4=
=
/uni221E
+Need s() , (6)k
i
i
Ss
0
,ti k
where δ⋅,⋅ is the Kronecker delta function. Notice that, for γ =  1, the need term is the 
exact count of how many visits to state sk are expected in the future, starting from 
current state St =  s.
The need term can be estimated by the SR41, which can be learned directly 
by the agent or computed from a model. Here we assume that the agent learns a 
state–state transition-probability model T  for the purpose of computing the need 
term. The need term is thus obtained directly from the nth row of the SR matrix, 
IT /uni03B3− −( ) 1, where n is the index of the agent’s current state St. An alternative option 
is to use the stationary distribution of the MDP , which estimates the asymptotic 
fraction of time spent in each state (that is, after convergence). This formulation 
is particularly useful when the transition probability from the agent’s current state 
is unavailable (for example, during sleep). The need term bears close resemblance 
to the concept of ‘need probability’ from rational models of human memory
54, 
the probability that an item needs to be retrieved from memory because of its 
relevance to the current situation.
Note that the utility of a backup depends simultaneously on gain and need. 
Thus, a backup that has no effect on behavior has zero utility, even if the target 
state is expected to be visited in the future (because it has zero gain, despite 
high need). Similarly, the utility of a backup is zero if a state is never expected 
to be visited again, even if this backup would greatly impact behavior at the that 
state (because it has zero need, despite high gain). Crucially, utility is computed 
separately for each individual backup. This ‘myopic’ view neglects the possibility 
that a backup may harvest additional gains by setting the stage for other, later 
backups.
Simulation details. We simulate two ‘grid-world’ environments (Fig. 1c) 
in which an agent can move in any of the four cardinal directions—that is, 
A = {up, down,r ight,l eft}. At each state, the agent selects an action according to a 
softmax decision rule over the estimated Q values, π(a|s) ∝  eβ⋅Q(s,a), where β is the 
inverse temperature parameter which sets the balance between exploration versus 
exploitation. In our simulations, β =  5. Upon selecting action A
t =  a in state St =  s, 
the agent observes a reward Rt =  r and is transported to an adjacent state St + 1 =  s′ .  
The value of Q(s, a) is then updated according to (3) using α =  1.0 and γ =  0.9. We 
use a learning rate of α =  1 due to it being both maximally simple and optimal 
when the world’s dynamics are deterministic.
The first environment—a linear track (Fig. 1c)—was simulated as two disjoint 
1 ×  10 segments. (The motivation for this was for the state space to differentiate 
both location and direction of travel, as do hippocampal place cells in this sort of 
Nature NeuroscieNce | www.nature.com/ natureneuroscience

===== PAGE 11 =====
ArticlesNaTUre NeUrOscieNce
environment; this also clearly disambiguates forward from reverse replay.) The 
agent starts in location (1, 1) of the first segment. Upon reaching the state (1, 10), 
the agent receives a unit reward with Gaussian noise added with standard deviation 
of σ =  0.1 (noise is added to each encountered reward to promote continuous 
learning). The agent is then transported to state (1, 10) of the second segment. 
Upon reaching state (1, 1) in the second segment, the agent receives a new unit 
reward (plus independent Gaussian noise with σ =  0.1) and is transported back to 
state (1, 1) of the first segment. Each simulation comprises 50 episodes (that is, 
sequences of steps from starting location to reward). The second environment is a 
6 ×  9 field with obstacles (Fig. 1c), with a unit reward (σ =  0.1) placed at coordinates 
(1, 9). Each simulation comprises 50 episodes with the start location randomized 
at each episode.
Our theory assumes that memory access leads to more accurate Q values. 
Improved estimates of action values can be obtained from samples of experience 
in which that action is used (whether by single-step or multistep sample backups). 
Thus, at every planning step we compute the need and gain for activating each 
possible one-step experience 
= /uni2032es ar s(, ,, )kk kk k ; these correspond to one-step 
updates given by (3). However, one of these experiences has special properties 
that permit additional learning if it is selected (which corresponds to a so-called 
n-step backup, from a version of the Bellman equation that sums n rewards before 
the recursive step, and which must be accounted for with different need and gain). 
In particular, if the target state action (s
k, ak) is an optimal continuation of the 
sequence replayed immediately previously (that is, if sk was the end state considered 
previously and ak is the optimal action there), then this replay can extend a 
previous one-step backup to a two-step backup, updating the values of both ak and 
the action replayed previously in light of the value at the next end state. Similarly, 
following an n-step backup, one experience corresponds to an optimal step n +  1, 
updating the values of all intermediate actions. Note that only the optimal action 
is allowed as a continuation of the sequence replayed previously. This is because 
n-step backups are only valid estimators of the target function if the choices, after 
the first, are on-policy with respect to the target function q*.
Such sequence-extending experience activations permit a special learning 
step and a corresponding special case of need/gain computation. If a sequence-
extending experience is activated, the corresponding learning rule applies an 
n-step Bellman update at each of the preceding states in the sequences (that is, it 
updates the value of all n preceding states/actions according to their subsequent 
cumulative, discounted rewards over the whole trajectory, plus the Q value of the 
best action a at the added state 
/uni2032sk). Implementationally, this can be accomplished 
using a Q(1) update rule over eligibility traces that are cleared whenever a sequence 
is not continued. The gain for this update, then, accumulates the gain over each 
of these state updates according to any policy changes at each, and this sum is 
multiplied by the need for the last state 
/uni2032sk (looking one step deeper at the value of 
an action only makes sense if the additional state is actually likely to be visited). 
Thus, a sequence-extending experience is only activated if the need is sufficiently 
large along the entire trajectory.
Thus, the utility of a multistep backup is computed as follows:
•	 Need is computed from the last (appended) state;
•	 Gain is summed for all actions along the trajectory (to reflect the fact that all 
actions are updated); and
•	 EVB ties are broken in favor of shorter sequences.
The inclusion of this case is important because it gives the model comparable 
ways to construct either forward or backward replay sequences by appending or 
prepending successive individual steps. Whether built forward or backward, these 
sequences are also equivalent in the sense that they ultimately update the values 
of all the states/actions along the trajectory with n-step returns. Note that the 
requirement that sampled forward trajectories follow what is currently believed 
to be the greedy policy does not mean they are uninformative; values updated 
along the path can change behavior (and also, potentially, the path sampled on 
subsequent rollouts). Conversely, a sequence-extending experience does not 
necessarily have a higher utility simply because it considers the cumulative gain 
over all intermediate states; if the value of the subsequent state is unsurprising 
(leading to small summed gains), or if the subsequent state is not expected to 
be visited (leading to a small need), the activation of a new, one-step experience 
elsewhere will be favored.
The agent is allowed 20 planning steps at the beginning and at the end of 
each episode. Because the gain term is a function of the current set of Q values, 
the utilities EVB are recomputed for all experiences after each planning step. To 
ensure that all 20 planning steps are used, a minimum gain of 10
−10 is used for all 
experiences. This small, nonzero minimal value is meant to capture an assumption 
of persistent uncertainty due to the possibility of environmental change.
Prior to the first episode, the agent is initialized with a full set of experiences 
corresponding to executing every action in every state (equivalent to a full state–
action–state transition model, which in sparse environments like these can be 
inferred directly from visual inspection when the agent first encounters the maze), 
including transitions from goal states to starting states. The state–state transition-
probability model T  (for the need term) is initialized from this model under a 
random action selection policy, and thereafter updated after each transition using 
a delta rule with learning rate T/uni03B1=.09 . In all simulations in the online setting, the 
need term is then estimated from the SR matrix, IT /uni03B3− −( ) 1. In the only simulation 
of sleep replay (Fig. 4g,h), in which the agent is not located in the environment 
where need is computed, we estimate the need term as the stationary distribution 
of the MDP , that is, the vector μ such that T/uni03BC/uni03BC= .
Identification of significant replay events. We classify each individual backup as 
forward or reverse by examining the next backup in the sequence. When a backed-up 
action is followed by a backup in that action’s resulting state, it is classified as forward. 
In contrast, when the state of a backup corresponds to the outcome of the following 
backed-up action, it is classified as reverse. Backups that do not follow either pattern 
are not classified in either category. To identify significant replay events, we follow 
standard empirical methods and assess, with a permutation test, the significance of all 
consecutive segments of forward/reverse backups of length five or greater
14,16,17.
Formal derivation. Below is a formal derivation of EVB for the general case of 
stochastic environments. Let the agent be in state S
t =  s at time t. The expected return 
from following policy π is defined as vπ(s) =  E 
 
/uni03B3/uni2211/uni2223=/uni03C0=
/uni221E
+RS si
k
ti t0 , and the true 
(yet unknown) value of taking action a in state s and following policy π thereafter is 
denoted by q
π(s, a). The utility of updating the agent’s policy from πold to πnew is
/uni2211/uni2211
/uni2211
/uni2211
/uni03C0/uni03C0
/uni03C0/uni03C0
/uni03C0/uni03C0
/uni03C0/uni03C0
/uni03C0
−= |− |
=| −|
+| −|
=| −|
+| −
/uni03C0/uni03C0 /uni03C0
/uni03C0
/uni03C0
/uni03C0
/uni03C0
/uni03C0
/uni03C0
/uni03C0/uni03C0
vs vs as qs aa s
qs a
as qs aa s
qs a
as qs aa s
qs a
as as qs a
as qs aq sa
() () () (, )( )
(, )
[( )( ,) ()
(, )
() (, )( )
(, )]
[( () () )( ,)
() (( ,) (, ))],
(7)
aa
a
a
newo ld
newo ld
oldo ld
newo ld
old
newo ld new
old
new
new
new
old
new
newo ld
where we have both added and subtracted the term /uni03C0/uni2223/uni03C0as qs a() (, )ldo ewn
 on the 
second line.
We then write q(s, a) in terms of v(s) using the definition of the MDP 
dynamics, p(s′ , r|s, a) ≐  Pr(St + 1 =  s′ , Rt =  r|St =  s, At =  a):
/uni2211 /uni03B3=/uni2032 |+ /uni2032./uni03C0 /uni03C0
/uni2032
qs ap sr sa rv s(, )( ,, )[ () ] (8)
sr,
Since the MDP dynamics does not depend on π, we can write
/uni2211
/uni2211
/uni2211
/uni03B3
/uni03B3
/uni03B3
−= /uni2032|+/uni2032
−/uni2032|+ /uni2032
=/uni2032 |/uni2032 −/uni2032.
/uni03C0/uni03C0 /uni03C0
/uni03C0
/uni03C0/uni03C0
/uni2032
/uni2032
/uni2032
qs aq sa ps rs ar vs
ps rs ar vs
ps sa vs vs
(, )( ,) (, ,) [( )]
(, ,) [( )]
(, )[ () () ]
(9)
sr
sr
s
,
,
newo ld new
old
newo ld
Substituting this result on (7):
/uni2211
/uni2211
/uni2211
/uni03C0/uni03C0
/uni03C0
/uni03C0/uni03C0
/uni03C0
/uni03B3
−= |− |
+| −
=| −|
+|
/uni2032| /uni2032−/uni2032.
/uni03C0/uni03C0 /uni03C0
/uni03C0/uni03C0
/uni03C0
/uni03C0/uni03C0
/uni2032
vs vs as as qs a
as qs aq sa
as as qs a
as
ps sa vs vs
() () [( () () )( ,)
() (( ,) (, ))]
[( () () )( ,)
()
(( ,) [( )( )])]
(10)
a
newo ld
old
a
newo ld
old
s
newo ld new
newo ld
new
newo ld
Note that (10) contains an expression for −/uni03C0/uni03C0vs vs() ()ew ldno  in terms of 
/uni2032−/uni2032/uni03C0/uni03C0vs vs() ()ew ldno . We can use this to ‘unroll’ the expression and write 
/uni2032−/uni2032/uni03C0/uni03C0vs vs() ()ew ldno  in terms of /uni2032/uni2032−/uni2032/uni2032/uni03C0/uni03C0vs vs() ()ew ldno . After repeated unrolling we obtain
S
/uni2211/uni2211
/uni2211
/uni03B3
/uni03C0/uni03C0 /uni03C0
−=
/uni2192| −|
/uni03C0/uni03C0
/uni03C0
/uni2208=
/uni221E
vs vs s
xi ax ax
qx a
() () Pr(
,, )[() () ]
(, ),
(11)
xi
i
a
0
oldn ew old
newo ld
new
Nature NeuroscieNce | www.nature.com/ natureneuroscience

===== PAGE 12 =====
Articles NaTUre NeUrOscieNce
where /uni03C0/uni2192sx iPr(, ,) ldo  is the probability of transitioning from state s to state x in i 
steps under policy πold.
Since the effect of a backup on state–action pair (sk, ak) is localized at a single 
state sk for punctate representations, πnew(a|x) =  πold(a|x), ∀ x ≠  sk, and thus there is 
only one nonzero term in the first summation:
/uni2211/uni2211/uni03B3/uni03C0 /uni03C0
/uni03C0
−= /uni2192|
−|
/uni03C0/uni03C0
/uni03C0
=
/uni221E
vs vs ss ia s
as qs a
() () Pr(, ,) [( )
() ]( ,)
(12)i
i
k
a
k
kk
0
oldn ew
old
newo ld
new
Denoting μπ(sk) =  /uni03B3/uni03C0/uni2211/uni2192=
/uni221EPr ss i(, ,)i
i
k0  as the discounted number of time-steps 
in which St =  sk in a randomly generated episode starting in St =  s and following π, 
we have
/uni2211/uni03BC/uni03C0 /uni03C0=| −|
=×
/uni03C0 /uni03C0EVBs as as as q
sa
Need sG ains a
(, )( )[() () ]
(, )
() (, ),
(13)
kk k
a
kk
k
kk k
newo ldold new
where Need(sk) =  /uni03BC/uni03C0s()kldo
 and Gain(sk, ak) =  /uni03C0/uni03C0/uni2211|− | /uni03C0as as qs a[( )( )] (, )a kk knewo ld new
.
We note that the same framework can be readily extended to the function 
approximation case and to policy gradient methods—that is, to computing the 
utility of a policy change even when the policies differ in multiple states (by using 
equation (11)). In this more general case, the above derivation corresponds to a 
discrete version of the policy gradient theorem55.
Code availability. All simulations were conducted using custom code written in 
MATLAB v9.1.0 (R2016b). Code is available at https://github.com/marcelomattar/
PrioritizedReplay.
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the 
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
r eferences
 51. Schultz, W ., Dayan, P . & Montague, P . R. A neural substrate of prediction and 
reward. Science 275, 1593–1599 (1997).
 52. Coulom, R. Efficient selectivity and backup operators in Monte-Carlo tree 
search. In International Conference on Computers and Games , 72–83 
(Springer, Heidelberg, Germany, 2006).
 53. Watkins, C. J. & Dayan, P . Q-learning. Mach. Learn. 8, 279–292 (1992).
 54. Anderson, J. R. & Milson, R. Human memory: an adaptive perspective. 
Psychol. Rev. 96, 703 (1989).
 55. Sutton, R. S., McAllester, D. A., Singh, S. P . & Mansour, Y . Policy gradient 
methods for reinforcement learning with function approximation. Adv. 
Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 12, 1057–1063 (2000).
Nature NeuroscieNce | www.nature.com/ natureneuroscience

===== PAGE 13 =====
1 nature research  |  reporting summaryApril 2018
Corresponding author(s): Marcelo G Mattar
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency 
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistical parameters
When statistical analyses are reported, confirm that the following items are present in the relevant location (e.g. figure legend, table legend, main 
text, or Methods section).
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
An indication of whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided 
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistics including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient) AND 
variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted 
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Clearly defined error bars 
State explicitly what error bars represent (e.g. SD, SE, CI)
Our web collection on statistics for biologists may be useful.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection All simulations were conducted using custom code written in MATLAB v9.1.0 (R2016b).
Data analysis All analyses were conducted using custom code written in MATLAB v9.1.0 (R2016b).
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers 
upon request. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable: 
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets 
- A list of figures that have associated raw data 
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
All simulations were conducted using custom code written in MATLAB v9.1.0 (R2016b). Code is available at https://github.com/marcelomattar/PrioritizedReplay.

===== PAGE 14 =====
2 nature research  |  reporting summaryApril 2018
Field-specific reporting
Please select the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences  Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/authors/policies/ReportingSummary-flat.pdf
Life sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Sample size All results are based on computer simulations. The number of simulations conducted in each analysis ensured that results were stable.
Data exclusions No data were excluded from the analyses.
Replication Given that all results are based on computer simulations, reproducibility is guaranteed.
Randomization Given that all results are based on computer simulations, no randomization was needed (aside from using an appropriate random number 
generator).
Blinding Given that all results are based on computer simulations, no blinding was needed.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
Materials & experimental systems
n/a Involved in the study
Unique biological materials
Antibodies
Eukaryotic cell lines
Palaeontology
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Methods
n/a Involved in the study
ChIP-seq
Flow cytometry
MRI-based neuroimaging