

===== PAGE 1 =====
1 
 
 
 
 
A model of autonomous interactions between hippocampus and 
neocortex driving sleep-dependent memory consolidation 
 
 
 
 
Dhairyya Singh*1, Kenneth A. Norman2, & Anna C. Schapiro*1 
 
1Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania  
2Department of Psychology and Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton 
University 
 
 
 
* Authors for correspondence: dsin@sas.upenn.edu, aschapir@sas.upenn.edu 
 
 
 
Abstract 
 
How do we build up our knowledge of the world over time? Many theories of memory formation 
and consolidation have posited that the hippocampus stores new information, then “teaches” this 
information to neocortex over time, especially during sleep. But it is unclear, mechanistically, 
how this actually works — how are these systems able to interact during periods with virtually 
no environmental input to accomplish useful learning and shifts in representation? We provide a 
framework for thinking about this question, with neural network model simulations serving as 
demonstrations. The model contains hippocampus and neocortical areas, which replay memories 
and interact with one another completely autonomously during simulated sleep. Oscillations are 
leveraged to support error-driven learning that leads to useful changes in memory representation 
and behavior. The model has a non-Rapid Eye Movement (NREM) sleep stage, where dynamics 
between hippocampus and neocortex are tightly coupled, with hippocampus helping neocortex to 
reinstate high-fidelity versions of new attractors, and a REM sleep stage, where neocortex is able 
to more freely explore existing attractors. We find that alternating between NREM and REM 
sleep stages, which alternately focuses the model’s replay on recent and remote information, 
facilitates graceful continual learning. We thus provide an account of how the hippocampus and 
neocortex can interact without any external input during sleep to drive useful new cortical 
learning and to protect old knowledge as new information is integrated.  
 
  
.CC-BY 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted February 1, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.31.478475doi: bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 2 =====
2 
Introduction 
 
Building our knowledge of the world over time requires the ability to quickly encode new 
information as we encounter it, store that information in a form that will serve us well in the long 
term, and carefully integrate the new information into our existing knowledge structures. These 
are difficult tasks, replete with pitfalls and trade-offs, but the brain seems to accomplish them 
gracefully. The Complementary Learning Systems (CLS) framework proposed that the brain 
achieves these feats through a division of labor across two interacting systems: The hippocampus 
encodes new information using a sparse, pattern-separated code, supporting rapid acquisition of 
arbitrary information without interference with existing neocortical knowledge (1). The 
hippocampus then gradually “teaches” its newly encoded experiences to the neocortex, which 
uses overlapping, distributed representations adept at representing the structure across these 
experiences, resulting in the construction of semantic knowledge over time. 
CLS considered the possibility that sleep may be a useful time for this teaching to occur, 
and other perspectives have also focused in on this idea, given the strong coupled dynamics and 
parallel replay that occurs in these areas during sleep (2–4). Extant theories of consolidation have 
focused particularly on Stages 2 and 3 of non-Rapid Eye Movement (NREM) sleep, when nested 
oscillations associated with memory replay — hippocampal sharp wave ripples, thalamocortical 
spindles, and neocortical slow oscillations — drive especially strong hippocampal-cortical 
interaction (2–11). These dynamics appear to be causally involved in memory consolidation: 
Manipulations that enhance hippocampal-cortical synchrony during sleep benefit memory (12–
16). 
 Not all theories agree on whether offline hippocampal-cortical interactions serve to 
increase the relative reliance on neocortex for episodic memories (17, 18), but most theories 
agree that the hippocampus helps to build and shape semantic representations in neocortex (19, 
20), and these theories often assign a central role to active processing during sleep (21, cf. 22). 
The core ideas, shared across several perspectives, that we adopt here are: 1) During sleep, the 
hippocampus actively helps to build neocortical semantic representations of information it has 
recently encoded, and 2) this process involves a transformation of memories, not simply a 
transfer of memories from hippocampus to cortex. We think these processes can usefully be 
referred to as “systems consolidation” (23), even though the way they are conceptualized here 
deviates in several respects from Standard Systems Consolidation Theory (17).  
 Despite all of this evidence and theorizing that the hippocampus “teaches” the neocortex 
new information in order to build up semantic representations during sleep, it is unclear 
mechanistically how this might actually occur. How can brain regions interact autonomously, 
with no input from the environment, to produce useful learning and reshaping of representations? 
How does the brain move from one memory to another offline, and which of these offline states 
does it learn from, and how? It does not seem likely that simple strengthening of existing 
connections through Hebbian learning will be sufficient — a more sophisticated restructuring of 
representations seems to be at work. The original formulation of the CLS framework (1) did not 
address these questions, since there was no true implemented hippocampus; as in many models 
of replay, the order and nature of inputs to cortex were engineered by hand. Here, we aim to fill 
this gap with a model that shows how an implemented cortex and hippocampus can interact, 
replay, and learn autonomously. 
 We will address two additional related limitations of the original CLS framework, 
namely that its solution to continual learning was too slow, and that it relied on the implausible 
assumption of a stationary environment (24). Hippocampal replay of an episode — for instance, 
.CC-BY 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted February 1, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.31.478475doi: bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 3 =====
3 
a first encounter with a penguin — was hypothesized to be interleaved over days, weeks, and 
months with a stationary distribution of bird input from the environment, allowing careful 
integration of the lone penguin encounter with the general structure of birds. This strategy is 
slow because it relies on these continued reminders over time about the distribution of 
information from the environment. But sleep-dependent memory consolidation, including 
integration of new information with existing knowledge, can occur quite quickly, over one night 
or several nights of sleep (6, 7, 25–28). The CLS framework fails in non-stationary environments 
because the environment no longer provides those required reminders of old information. 
Humans do not have this problem: We can, for example, speak one language much of our lives 
and then move to a new place where we encounter only a new language, without forgetting the 
first language. Norman, Newman, & Perotte (2005) proposed that alternating NREM and REM 
sleep stages across the course of a night may be the key to solving these problems (24). The 
hippocampus and neocortex are less coupled during REM (2), potentially providing an 
opportunity for neocortex to visit and explore its existing attractor space. This could serve to 
provide the reminders about remote knowledge needed to avoid new information overwriting the 
old, without the slow wait for the environment to provide those reminders. 
We will present simulations that demonstrate 1) how the hippocampus can begin to 
autonomously teach neocortex new information during NREM sleep, and 2) how alternating 
NREM/REM sleep stages allows for rapid integration of that new information into existing 
knowledge. Our model architecture includes our previously-developed model of the 
hippocampus, C-HORSE (Complementary Hippocampal Operations for Representing Statistics 
and Episodes; 27, 28), as well as a neocortical layer as the target of consolidation (Fig 1A). Our 
learning scheme leverages oscillations during sleep to support error-driven learning (24). The 
model’s units employ a rate code, which means that oscillations do not have a true frequency that 
would correspond to particular frequencies of activity in the sleeping brain. But we imagine that 
our NREM oscillations correspond in function to sleep spindles, when replay and enhanced 
plasticity have been shown to occur (31, 32), and our REM oscillations to theta oscillations, 
which have been associated with enhanced plasticity in that stage (24, 33, 34). We simulate the 
difference between NREM and REM sleep as a difference in the degree of communication 
between hippocampus and neocortex (2). There are of course many other important differences 
between NREM and REM sleep (3), but for these simulations, we aimed to isolate the 
contribution of this factor. Together, the simulations demonstrate how sleep can build our 
neocortical knowledge over time, with the hippocampus initially helping to construct neocortical 
representations during NREM sleep, and the hippocampus and cortex working together across 
NREM/REM stage alternation to integrate this new information with existing knowledge. 
 
 
Model simulations 
 
In the model, sleep is initiated with a single injection of noise to all units, after which all 
external input is silenced. The model then autonomously moves from attractor to attractor, 
corresponding to items learned during wake. We use stability in the model’s dynamics as a 
trigger to initiate a learning trial. When the model initially falls into each attractor state, activity 
tends to be highly stable from one processing cycle to the next, and this high stability initiates a 
“plus” phase (Fig 1B,1C). Short-term synaptic depression destabilizes the attractor by 
temporarily weakening synapses in proportion to the coactivity of their connected units. As 
.CC-BY 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted February 1, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.31.478475doi: bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 4 =====
4 
stability drops, the model transitions into a “minus” phase. Oscillations are always present in the 
sleeping model, but they become more prominent in the minus phase, as synaptic depression 
begins to distort an attractor. These oscillations in inhibition levels reveal aspects of the attractor 
in need of change: when inhibition is high, the weakest units in the attractor drop out, revealing 
the parts of the memory that need strengthening, and when inhibition is low, nearby potentially-
interfering memories or spurious associations become active, revealing competitors in need of 
weakening (Fig 1B, 1C).  
 
 
 
Fig 1. Model architecture and sleep algorithm. (A) The architecture included C-HORSE (purple outlines) 
— our model of the hippocampus, and a neocortical layer as the target of consolidation (orange outline). 
(B) When replaying attractor X, all units participating in the attractor have strong, stable activity during 
the plus phase. During the minus phase, phases of higher inhibition lead to lower activity, with the 
weakest units in attractor X dropping out, and phases of lower inhibition lead to higher activity, causing 
activity spreading to a nearby attractor, Y. (C) Stability trace for a real learning event, with background 
colors indicating the plus and minus phases. When the model first falls into an attractor, its activity is 
highly stable and triggers the plus phase. Short-term synaptic depression gradually destabilizes the 
attractor. The stability drop causes the plus phase to end and the minus phase begins. As the attractor 
further destabilizes, the minus phase ends. 
.CC-BY 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted February 1, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.31.478475doi: bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 5 =====
5 
As the attractor activity further destabilizes, the minus phase ends and the model 
traverses to the next attractor. Weights are updated at the end of every minus phase via 
Contrastive Hebbian Learning, which locally adjusts minus phase unit coactivities (product of 
sender and receiver activity over time) towards their plus phase coactivities (35). This serves to 
both strengthen weak parts of an attractor (the contrast between the plus phase and the higher 
inhibition moments in the minus phase) and weaken competitors (the contrast between the plus 
phase and the lower inhibition moments of the minus phase). This algorithm is closely related to 
the Oscillating Learning Rule (OLR; 24), which used oscillations to similarly distort attractors 
and improve memory, but the OLR requires the network to track where it is in an oscillation and 
change the sign of the learning rule accordingly. The current learning scheme does not require 
tracking this information (but does require a measure of stability).  
 
Simulation 1: Building neocortical representations of novel information 
         In this simulation, we explored how the hippocampus helps to rapidly shape neocortical 
representations of novel information. As a demonstration, we simulated a paradigm in which we 
have found sleep effects that influence behavior quickly (across a night of sleep or even a nap) 
and that have hallmarks of the construction of new neocortical knowledge (27, 36). In the 
experiment, participants were asked to learn the features of fifteen satellites belonging to three 
different classes (Fig 2A; 27). Each satellite exemplar had features shared with other members of 
the class, as well as features unique to the exemplar. As in the human participant sleep group, the 
model was first trained to a learning criterion of 66% and then allowed to sleep, with tests before 
and after sleep to assess changes in performance (Fig 2C, 3A). In this simulation, sleep 
corresponds to the dynamics of NREM, with tightly coupled hippocampal and neocortical areas.  
The model was trained during wake using feature inference, which is analogous to how 
humans were trained in the experiment. Each satellite’s seven features (five visual, class name, 
and codename) were presented on separate input/output layers (representing entorhinal cortex) as 
inputs to the hidden layers of the model. Each training trial consisted of presenting the model 
with a satellite with one feature missing, at which point the model guessed the identity of the 
feature. The correct answer was then clamped onto the corresponding layer. Contrastive Hebbian 
Learning was used to update the weights based on the difference between the model’s prediction 
and the correct answer (35). To better match model performance on shared and unique features 
during wake training, as with human participants, unique features were queried much more often. 
The learning rate was much higher in the hippocampus than cortex, so — while learning 
happened during wake across the model — behavior was initially supported almost entirely by 
the hippocampus. Cortical representations were on average less sparse than hippocampal 
representations and reflected category structure more strongly. For this paradigm, which requires 
integrating high level verbal and visual information, the neocortical module might correspond to 
an area of the brain representing consolidated semantic knowledge, like the anterior temporal 
lobe (37). Anterior cingulate cortex / medial prefrontal cortex is also often involved as an 
important neocortical target of systems consolidation (38, 39). 
 
.CC-BY 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted February 1, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.31.478475doi: bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 6 =====
6 
 
Fig 2. Schapiro et al. (2017) category learning paradigm and results. (A) Satellite exemplars studied from 
three categories. (B) Performance change for unique and shared features from pre- to post-sleep tests. *p 
< .05. (Results are collapsed across the frequency manipulation included in that study.) (C) Experimental 
protocol: Participants studied the satellites in the evening, had an immediate test, and were tested again 12 
hours later, after a night of sleep. 
 
After the wake learning criterion was achieved, we allowed the model to go into NREM 
sleep, enabling hippocampal-cortical replay. The cortical learning rate was increased, inspired by 
evidence for enhanced plasticity in sleep (40). To isolate the impact of replay on neocortical 
learning, we paused hippocampal learning during sleep. The model traversed from attractor to 
attractor corresponding to the studied satellite exemplars. Replay occurred concurrently in the 
hippocampus and neocortical modules. We found that replay was interleaved across exemplars 
with a small preference for within-category transitions (39.2% within-category transitions 
relative to chance 33.3%; p < 0.001 by binomial test [N = 2162, K = 847]; Fig. 3C). We assessed 
performance changes as a result of NREM sleep and found that performance on shared features 
improved significantly (p < 0.001) while performance on unique features was preserved across 
sleep (Fig. 3B), which corresponds to the pattern observed in the human experiment shown in 
Fig. 2B as well as the behavioral data from our imaging study using this paradigm (36). 
The preferential benefit for shared features could potentially be related to their greater 
frequency of occurrence, given that they appear many times across exemplars, whereas unique 
features only appear with one exemplar. To rule out the possibility that sleep is simply 
benefitting higher-frequency features, we ran a separate set of simulations in which we added an 
extra feature to each exemplar that appeared across categories but was matched in frequency to 
the shared features. We found that these “cross-cutting” features did not benefit from sleep 
replay (Fig 3B), suggesting that neocortical learning was sensitive to the true category structure, 
rather than simply frequency of feature appearance. 
We assessed whether, for each simulation, the number of times a particular satellite was 
replayed was associated with improvement in memory for that satellite. This resulted in a 
correlation across 15 exemplars for each simulation, which we Fisher transformed and averaged 
.CC-BY 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted February 1, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.31.478475doi: bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 7 =====
7 
across simulations. We found that, across simulations, there was a positive correlation between 
performance changes and replay frequency (Fig. 3E), which was especially strong for shared 
features, indicating that replay during sleep was driving performance changes. This is consistent 
with the results from our imaging study of this paradigm, where we found that awake replay of 
the satellites in the hippocampus (which we took to be representative of what would continue to 
happen during sleep) predicted memory improvement across sleep (36). 
 
Fig 3. Simulation 1: Category learning consolidation across one night of sleep. (A) Simulation protocol. 
(B) Change in model performance from before to after sleep for unique features, shared features, and 
cross-cutting features. (C) Chord plot of replay transitions, with A, B & C indicating categories. Arrow 
base indicates transition initiation and head indicates termination. Arrow width indicates proportion of 
replays for a given satellite. The plot shows that replay was interleaved uniformly across exemplars (with 
a small preference for within-category transitions). (D) Left: Change in pairwise correlation across items 
from before to after sleep. Black boxes indicate within-category changes. Right: Averaged pairwise 
correlation change within and across categories. (E) Fisher-transformed correlation between exemplar 
replay frequency during sleep and performance change, averaged across model initializations. All error 
bars represent +/- one SEM across network initializations.  
.CC-BY 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted February 1, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.31.478475doi: bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 8 =====
8 
 We next examined change in neocortical representations across sleep. We conducted a 
representation similarity analysis by calculating pairwise correlations of patterns of neocortical 
unit activity for all satellite exemplars pre- and post-sleep. We found that, from before to after 
sleep, there was increased within-category similarity and a small decrease in across-category 
similarity (Fig 3D). 
 The results from Simulation 1 provide a way of thinking about how the hippocampus can 
help the neocortex build up new semantic representations. With a fast learning rate in the 
hippocampus and slow rate in neocortex during wake learning, the hippocampus will be 
responsible for most behavior prior to sleep. Offline, the hippocampus can help the neocortex to 
reinstate stable versions of the new memories. Because the neocortex has more highly distributed 
representations than the hippocampus, it tends to find the shared structure across exemplars, 
resulting in improved understanding of the category structure in this paradigm. These dynamics 
occur completely autonomously, with three key ingredients: 1) Short-term synaptic depression 
causes the hippocampus and neocortex to move in tandem from one attractor to the next, 
resulting in interleaved replay of recent experience; 2) as synaptic depression destabilizes an 
attractor, oscillations increasingly distort the attractor to reveal aspects of the memory in need of 
change; and 3) the model learns toward highly stable states and away from the subsequent, 
relatively-unstable states, resulting in memory shifts and strengthening. 
 
Simulation 2: Integration of recent and remote knowledge 
We next turned to simulating the potential role of sleep in allowing graceful continual 
learning. We defined two related environments, Env 1 and Env 2. Each environment contained 
10 items, with seven units each. Two out of seven units overlapped between the first item in Env 
1 and the first item in Env 2, between the second item in Env 1 and the second item in Env 2, and 
so on. There was no overlap across items within an environment. This is a variant of the classic 
AB-AC interference paradigm (41–44). To simulate new learning in Env 2 after having fully 
consolidated Env 1 in neocortex, we trained the neocortical hidden layer fully on Env 1. Next, 
the full network was trained on the related Env 2, with hippocampus primarily supporting 
performance, as in Simulation 1, given its faster learning rate. We then allowed the model to go 
into either an alternating sleep protocol, alternating five epochs of NREM and REM sleep, or 
into five sequential NREM epochs (Fig 4A). NREM was implemented as above, with strong 
coupled dynamics between hippocampus and neocortex, whereas REM allowed neocortex to 
explore its attractor space without influence from the hippocampus.  
We expected that Env 2 replay would unfold during NREM sleep in a manner analogous 
to Simulation 1, with hippocampus helping the neocortex to replay and learn the Env 2 patterns. 
During REM, with less influence from the hippocampus, we expected that neocortex would be 
able to replay the well-consolidated remote Env 1 memories. This could serve to provide 
reminders about Env 1 to prevent Env 2 from overwriting Env 1. We observed, as expected, that 
NREM tended to focus on Env 2 items (lower distance from plus phase patterns to Env 2 items; 
Fig 4B) whereas REM tended to focus on the remote Env 1 items.  
 We found that alternating NREM and REM allowed the neocortex to reduce error on Env 
2 without a catastrophic increase in error on Env 1 (Fig 4C). Consecutive epochs of NREM sleep 
also resulted in reduction of error on Env 2 but led to a much more substantial increase in error 
on Env 1.  
 Alternating NREM and REM may thus support graceful continual learning, with NREM 
helping to build neocortical representations of recent information while REM acts to protect the 
.CC-BY 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted February 1, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.31.478475doi: bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 9 =====
9 
old information from this new potential interference (45). This alternation should be especially 
important to the degree that new and old information overlap and therefore threaten interference; 
when new information is unrelated to prior knowledge (as in Simulation 1), reminders of old 
knowledge are likely not needed (46).  
 
 
Fig 4. Simulation 2: Continual learning via alternating sleep stages. (A) Simulation protocol. (B) L1 
distance of plus phase attractors to Env 1 & 2 item patterns in REM and NREM. Smaller distance 
indicates more replay of those patterns. (C) Error across sleep for Env 1 & 2 items for alternating 
NREM/REM (N/R) vs. NREM-only conditions. 
 
Discussion 
 
 Our simulations demonstrate how the hippocampus can autonomously teach the 
neocortex new information during NREM sleep, and how alternating between NREM and REM 
sleep over the course of the night can promote graceful integration of new information into 
existing cortical knowledge. The hippocampus is implemented as our C-HORSE model, which is 
able to quickly learn new categories and statistics in the environment, in addition to individual 
episodes (29, 30, 47). We extend the model with a neocortical area that serves as the target of 
consolidation and with a sleep environment that allows learning and dynamics between these 
areas to unfold autonomously offline.  
Simulation 1 demonstrates how the hippocampus can begin to shape neocortical 
knowledge during a first bout of NREM sleep. We think of this as the very beginning of systems 
consolidation, not the complete process. Still, one night of sleep (or even a nap) is sufficient to 
appreciably change behavior in many paradigms, including the task simulated here (27, 36). 
Sleep begins by seeding the network with random activity. The network then falls into an 
attractor that happens to resemble that activity, and moves from attractor to attractor due to a 
short-term synaptic depression mechanism which weakens synapses as a function of their recent 
activity. We find that this mechanism results in interleaved replay of attractors, which sets the 
.CC-BY 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted February 1, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.31.478475doi: bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 10 =====
10 
stage for useful structure learning (1). When the network first falls into an attractor, activity is 
highly stable, and the network uses these stable states as targets to learn towards. Oscillations 
then distort these attractors, revealing contrasting states to learn away from — both weak parts of 
an attractor in need of strengthening and competing attractors in need of weakening. During 
NREM, the hippocampus helps the neocortex to reinstate strong versions of attractors 
(neocortex’s own attractors for new information would not be strong enough to support offline 
learning on their own), and this autonomous error-driven learning allows useful weight updates 
from these states. Almost all prior models of replay, including the original CLS model, do not 
have this fully autonomous dynamic (48, cf. 49). Typically, the model architect exerts some 
control over the input to the model on a given replay trial, and indeed defines what a “trial” is. 
However, a large part of the computational puzzle of understanding learning during sleep is 
understanding how the system can generate its own learning trials, and our account provides a 
demonstration of how this can work. 
The mechanisms thus act as hypotheses for how sleep carries out autonomous replay: 
once the system has visited an attractor, there should be an endogenous mechanism of leaving 
this attractor in order to transition to the next, which we hypothesize manifests as a form of 
adaptation at the synaptic level. Unit level adaptation or homeostatic mechanisms may also be 
possible (49), though they should result in less ability to transition between closely related 
memories (which are likely to share units). To define offline learning trials, we hypothesize that 
the brain contrasts periods of stable with periods of perturbed activity, consistent with several 
accounts of biologically plausible error-driven learning (50–52). We further hypothesize that 
oscillations (ripples/spindles in NREM and theta in REM) enhance learning during sleep by 
distorting attractors during the unstable (minus phase) periods in ways that are informative about 
flaws in the network’s representation. This implies that dampening or eliminating these 
oscillations would reduce the efficacy of learning during sleep, consistent with findings from 
both NREM and REM sleep (33, 53). 
In Simulation 1, as in our human experiment results, we found that these autonomous 
learning dynamics resulted in enhanced memory for features of exemplars shared across a 
category while preserving memory for exemplar-unique features. This was not due to shared 
features appearing more frequently in the stimulus set, as frequency-matched features that 
appeared across categories did not show this improvement. Sleep resulted in increased similarity 
for neocortical representations of items in the same category, consistent with the literature 
suggesting that sleep helps to extract the structure or central tendencies of a domain (39, 54–56). 
To the extent that detailed information is present in the hippocampus, it should be able to help 
neocortex learn this detailed information, and there is extensive evidence that sleep indeed 
benefits retention of detailed information (26, 57, 58). However, the overlapping nature of 
representations in the neocortex (especially relative to the hippocampus) implies that neocortex 
will tend to emphasize shared structure over the course of systems consolidation. 
Simulation 2 proposes a role for alternating NREM and REM sleep stages in enabling 
successful continual learning. We simulated learning of a new environment, reliant on the 
hippocampus, after the neocortex had already consolidated an old, related environment. We 
found that the hippocampus helps to build neocortical representations of the new environment 
during NREM sleep (as in Simulation 1) and the neocortex then reinstates the old environment 
during REM sleep, allowing careful integration of the new information into neocortex without 
overwriting the old. Our proposal is strongly consistent with studies suggesting that memory 
reactivation during SWS sets up subsequent integration into existing knowledge during REM 
.CC-BY 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted February 1, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.31.478475doi: bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 11 =====
11 
(59, 60), and more generally with the idea that both NREM and REM sleep are critical for 
memory integration, with the ordering of the stages being consequential (61, 62).  
The simulation demonstrates how a night of sleep can serve to protect against 
interference even in non-stationary environments. The original CLS framework did not provide 
an account of this learning scenario, as it required the environment to continue to provide 
reminders of old knowledge, the role taken over by REM here. The sleep model of Norman et al.  
(24) showed how REM can provide the necessary reminder and repair function (63), but 
implemented continued exposure from the environment over time to learn the new knowledge, 
the role taken over by NREM here. Deep neural networks performing both experience replay and 
generative replay have had impressive success in tackling the problem of continual learning in 
complex nonstationary environments (64–68). Our approach is related in benefitting from offline 
interleaved replay, but fleshes out the autonomous interactions between the hippocampus and 
cortex that may support this learning, and explains how this can happen quickly upon transition 
to a new environment through the alternation of NREM and REM sleep. 
Overall, we view the process of sleep-dependent memory consolidation not as a simple 
strengthening of individual memories or weakening of noise (69), but instead as a restructuring 
that acts to update our internal models of the world to better reflect the environment over time. 
According to our framework, new information learned over the course of one waking period will 
be quickly encoded by the hippocampus. We predict that the hippocampus and neocortex will 
then concurrently replay this information in interleaved order during NREM sleep, with the 
hippocampus helping the neocortex to reinstate higher-fidelity versions of recent information 
than the neocortex could support without hippocampal influence. This interleaved replay should 
support new learning in neocortex that serves to especially emphasize the structure of the new 
domain, increasing representational overlap between related entities. This prediction has not yet 
been directly tested, but it is consistent with a finding of increased representational overlap over 
time for related memories in medial prefrontal cortex (39). The hippocampus could help the 
neocortex to reinstate higher-fidelity representations of recent experience even if the 
hippocampus was not required for the initial learning, consistent with recent findings in humans 
and rodents (70, 71), as long as the hippocampus was encoding the details of the experience in 
parallel with other regions. 
 Our account also makes predictions about sleep stage contributions to memory 
consolidation. First, NREM sleep should more frequently visit attractors corresponding to recent 
experience, and REM sleep should more frequently visit attractors corresponding to remote, 
consolidated knowledge, though this is not absolute. This prediction is consistent with the 
finding that NREM dreams incorporate more recent episodic information in comparison to REM 
dreams, which incorporate more existing semantic information (72). There have been very few 
empirical demonstrations of replay during REM (73, 74), and our account suggests that this may 
be partly because REM is not as focused on recent experience, which is the subject of most 
experiments. Our account predicts that integration of new information without disruption to 
existing knowledge requires NREM-REM alternations. If REM is suppressed, or in particular if 
replay during REM is suppressed, the account predicts eventual overwriting of old information 
that is related to new information (Fig 2C). 
Our model’s simulations are intended as demonstrations as opposed to a full account of 
offline consolidation, but there are exciting possible future directions, as well as complementary 
modeling frameworks that already help to provide a more complete understanding. For example, 
our current model does not simulate changes in memory across periods of wake. Often sleep 
.CC-BY 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted February 1, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.31.478475doi: bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 12 =====
12 
studies find a marked reduction in performance with wake, including in our satellite category 
learning study (27). Simple reductions in performance can be simulated through interference 
caused by waking experience and/or decay in weight strengths over time. However, the story is 
not so simple, because awake replay can be beneficial for memory (75–78). It may be that awake 
replay works against other causes of memory degradation, and/or that awake replay does not 
result in the kind of lasting improvements to performance that sleep replay does; perhaps awake 
replay leads to short term, local improvements, but the specialized coordinated hippocampal-
cortical replay dynamics that exist during sleep are needed for persistent systems-level change 
(79). 
We have used the word “replay” in the manner it is used in the modeling literature — 
offline reactivation of any information previously experienced in the environment. Sometimes 
the word is reserved in the empirical literature for the sequential reactivation of states 
experienced in a particular order. Most of the rodent literature has studied this sequential 
reactivation, and it will be important for future versions of our model to simulate these kinds of 
sequential paradigms, taking inspiration from other modeling frameworks that have focused on 
simulating sequential reactivation (49, 80, 81). 
Another limitation of our framework is that our use of a rate code (unit activation values 
that correspond to a rate of firing across time) make the modeling of oscillations more abstract, 
and limit the ability to explain or make predictions about detailed oscillatory dynamics across the 
brain. However, a biologically detailed thalamocortical neural network model has been 
developed to engage with these dynamics and provides important insight into how they may 
contribute to memory consolidation (49, 82, 83). Having these models at different levels of 
abstraction is useful in creating the full bridge from individual neurons to dynamics across 
systems to complex behavioral tasks. 
 Another important missing piece in the current modeling framework, which has been 
tackled in other frameworks (46, 48, 80, 84, 85), is an explanation of how memories are 
prioritized for replay, for example along dimensions of emotion, reward, or future-relevance 
(54). We and others have also found evidence for prioritization of weaker memories for offline 
processing (27, 36, 43, 63, 86). Prioritization of weaker information is not something that falls 
naturally out of the current framework; an additional tagging mechanism is needed to mark 
memories with higher uncertainty or error during or after learning for later replay.  
Our current simulations focused on hippocampal influence on neocortical representations 
during sleep, but future simulations should also consider sleep-dependent learning locally within 
the hippocampus (34), including differential learning in the monosynaptic (MSP) and trisynaptic 
pathways (TSP). Some of the behavioral change seen in the sleep consolidation literature could 
arise from this local hippocampal learning (22). 
The hippocampus module in our framework is a version of our C-HORSE model (29, 30, 
47), which rapidly learns both new statistical and episodic information, in its MSP and TSP, 
respectively. The original CLS framework proposed that the hippocampus handles the rapid 
synaptic changes involved in encoding new episodes, in order to prevent the interference that 
would occur from attempting to make these synaptic changes directly in neocortex. The 
neocortex then slowly extracts the statistics across these episodes to build up semantic 
information over time (weeks, months, years). But we can learn new semantic and statistical 
information much more quickly than this (within minutes or hours) and the hippocampus is 
likely responsible for much of this learning (29, 47, 71). Our view is thus that the hippocampus 
.CC-BY 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted February 1, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.31.478475doi: bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 13 =====
13 
acts as a temporary buffer for both statistics and episodes — for any novel information requiring 
large synaptic changes that might cause interference if implemented directly in neocortex. 
 The hippocampus in the original CLS account (and also in experience replay models) 
functions somewhat like the TSP in our hippocampus model, replaying individual episodes and 
exemplars with high fidelity. The MSP, however, is more sensitive to the structure across 
experiences (29, 47). This suggests the possibility of generalized replay, which has indeed been 
observed (87, 88), and which may serve to catalyze the consolidation of structured information 
(89).  
We have modeled the hippocampus and one generic neocortical module, but of course the 
brain is much more heterogeneous and hierarchical than this. We could consider the TSP and the 
neocortex module as two points on a spectrum, with the TSP learning very quickly using 
orthogonalized representations, and the neocortex learning slowly using overlapping 
representations. The MSP has intermediate learning speed and overlap in its representations, and 
perhaps hierarchically organized neocortical regions form a gradient (90), with slower learning 
as a region gets closer to the sensory periphery — from hippocampus, to MTL cortex, to high 
level sensory regions, to low level sensory regions. Each region could help to train the adjacent 
slower region through concurrent offline replay. The hippocampus — both the MSP and TSP — 
may be especially important for tracking information across the time period of one day (or across 
one waking period, for animals sleeping in shorter bouts). Then, with the first bout of sleep, the 
hippocampus starts to help adjacent neocortical areas build representations of the new 
information from the prior waking period. 
While some learning does occur in neocortex during initial waking exposure, both in our 
model and in the brain, it may not typically stabilize or be strong enough to support behavior 
prior to hippocampal influence during sleep (91–93). When information is strongly consistent 
with prior knowledge, there may be the possibility for small tweaks that allow direct integration 
into neocortical areas without the need for extensive offline restructuring (94, 95). Our account, 
as well as the original CLS account, predicts that with enough exposure, any information, even 
completely novel information, can eventually be learned in neocortex without hippocampal 
influence (perhaps explaining the high functioning of developmental amnesics; 96). But novel 
information can be learned much faster if it goes through the process of quick encoding in the 
hippocampus followed by neocortical integration offline. 
 In summary: The model provides a framework for understanding how the hippocampus 
can help shape new representations in neocortex, and how alternating NREM/REM sleep cycles 
across the night continues to allow additions to this knowledge as we encounter new information 
over time. We hope it will inspire empirical tests and provide a foundation for exploring the 
mechanisms underlying a range of sleep-dependent memory findings. 
 
 
 
Methods 
 
We implemented our simulations in the Emergent neural network framework (97). The 
model consists of units with rate code activations (using the NXX1 activation function) 
organized into layers and connected by learnable weights. Feedforward feedback (FFFB) 
inhibition is implemented to simulate inhibitory network dynamics. 
 
.CC-BY 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted February 1, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.31.478475doi: bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 14 =====
14 
Model architecture 
The model architecture for both simulations consisted of the four C-HORSE hidden 
layers representing the DG, CA3, pCA1, and dCA1 subfields of the hippocampus, and one 
neocortical hidden layer (see Supplementary Material for parameter details). Previously C-
HORSE has been employed to simulate hippocampal contributions to statistical learning, 
associative inference, and category learning (29, 30, 47) and comes from a lineage of 
hippocampal models of episodic memory (16, 98). We adopted the version from Zhou et al. (30), 
which divides CA1 into proximal and distal components. 
Input/output layers in Simulation 1 consisted of seven feature layers, each corresponding 
to a satellite feature’s high level visual and verbal representation in Entorhinal Cortex (EC). 
Simulation 2 had a separate input and output layer, corresponding to superficial and deep EC 
layers (29, 30). 
 
Wake training 
We departed from the Emergent default learning in using a fully error-driven learning 
scheme with Contrastive Hebbian Learning (CHL; 35). CHL computes errors locally but behaves 
similarly to the backpropagation algorithm (52, 99). In each trial, CHL contrasts two states: a 
“plus” phase in which targets are provided, and a “minus” state, where the model makes a guess 
without a target. Given a learning rate parameter ϵ and settled sender (s) and receiver (r) 
activations at each synapse in the last cycle of the plus (+) and minus (-) phases, each weight 
update (Δw) is calculated as: 
Δ𝑤 = 𝜖[(𝑠!𝑟!) − (𝑠"𝑟")] 
 
In the first simulation, the model was trained on fifteen satellite exemplars from three 
categories (Fig 2A). Each satellite consisted of seven features (five visual parts, a classname, and 
a codename) of which some were shared across exemplars from a category and others unique to 
each exemplar. Satellites were chosen randomly in each training trial and one feature was held 
out. Features were presented as one-hot inputs on the corresponding input/output feature layer 
and were held out at a ratio of unique:shared = 99:1 (to better match unique and shared learning 
speed, unique features need to be queried the vast majority of the time). Each training trial 
consisted of a minus and plus phase. In the minus phase the satellite was presented to the model 
with a feature held out and the model generated a prediction for the identity of the feature. In the 
plus phase, the full satellite was presented to the model. The model was trained to a criterion of 
66% feature completion performance for shared and for unique features. All results are averages 
across 100 model initializations. All weights were randomly sampled from uniform distributions 
with every new initialization (means and ranges listed in Supplementary Material). 
In the second simulation, each training trial minus phase involved clamping an Env 1 or 
Env 2 item on the input layer and requiring the model to reproduce that item on the output layer. 
Each environment had 10 items and each item consisted of seven units. Env 1 and Env 2 item 
units were chosen such that there was a 2/7 unit overlap between corresponding items from Env 
1 and Env 2 (between Item 1 from Env 1 and Item 1 from Env 2, Item 2 from Env 1 and Item 2 
from Env 2, and so on). There was no overlap between items from the same environment. The 
same set of items were used across all initializations of the model. In the plus phase, the item was 
clamped onto both the input and output layer. The training protocol involved first overtraining 
the model with only the neocortical hidden layer active on Env 1 items to simulate consolidated 
remote knowledge. We trained the model for thirty epochs after reaching zero error. We then 
.CC-BY 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted February 1, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.31.478475doi: bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 15 =====
15 
switched to Env 2 training, with both the hippocampus and neocortex engaged in learning to zero 
error. Weight changes were calculated via CHL (Eq1) based on the coactivation differences 
between the plus and minus phases in both simulations. All results are averages across 30 model 
initializations. 
 
Wake testing 
For both simulations, testing involved presenting the input patterns and allowing the 
model to generate an output using its learned weights. The model was evaluated on the distance 
of its output to the target. In Simulation 1, performance for the 78 shared and 27 unique features 
across the satellite exemplars was individually tested on feature-held-out testing trials in each 
testing epoch. The model’s performance on each trial was judged as correct if it generated 
activity on the correct units greater than a threshold of 0.5 and activity on incorrect units less 
than 0.5. Shared and unique proportion correct scores were then separately calculated by 
averaging binary correct/incorrect responses in each feature category for each model 
initialization. These results were then averaged across random initializations. 
In Simulation 2, testing performance was calculated as the sum of squared errors in the 
model’s response on the output layer for each testing trial. Each testing epoch consisted of 
testing all ten Env 1 items and all ten Env 2 items. 
 
Sleep activity dynamics 
Sleep epochs were initiated with a random noise injection after which all external inputs 
were silenced. Recirculating activity dynamics allowed the model to autonomously reinstate 
learned item attractors. Each synapse in the model was subject to short-term synaptic depression 
on its weight as a function of coactivation-induced calcium accumulation. Given 𝐶𝑎#$% , 𝐶𝑎&'% 
time constant parameters, s sender activation, r receiver activation and wt synaptic weight, the 
calcium update on each processing cycle was computed as: 
 
𝛥𝐶𝑎 = 𝐶𝑎#$% (1 − 𝐶𝑎)0(𝑟 · 𝑠 · 𝑤𝑡) − 𝐶𝑎&'% 3𝐶𝑎 
 
Given a calcium-based depression threshold parameter 𝐶𝑎()*and gain parameter 𝑆𝐷+,#$, 
synaptic depression was computed on the weights as: 
 If 𝐶𝑎 > 𝐶𝑎()*: 
  𝑊𝑡	 = 	𝑊𝑡 · 81	–	:0𝑆𝐷+,#$	(1 − 𝐶𝑎()*)".3(𝐶𝑎	– 	𝐶𝑎()*);<
/
 
 
Inhibitory oscillations were implemented via a parameterized sinusoidal wave. Given the default 
layer FFFB inhibitory conductance Gi parameter 𝐺𝑖&'0, amplitude 𝐴, period 𝑃, a midline shift 𝑆 
and processing cycle 𝑐, the FFFB Gi parameter 𝐺𝑖% for a given cycle for each layer was set as: 
 
𝐺𝑖% = 𝐺𝑖&'0 ∗ 𝐴 · 𝑠𝑖𝑛(2𝜋 · (𝑃 · 𝑐)".) + 𝑆 
 
 
Sleep learning 
Sleep learning events were defined by the stability of model activity, calculated as the 
average temporal autocorrelation of layer activity in the model. Given n model layers’ activity L 
.CC-BY 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted February 1, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.31.478475doi: bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 16 =====
16 
indexed by i, processing cycle c and the Pearson’s correlation function Corr, stability was 
computed as: 
 
𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 = J 𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟(𝐿#(𝑐), (𝐿#(𝑐 − 1))
$
#12
𝑛". 
 
Plus phases were marked as contiguous cycles where stability was greater than a strict 
plus threshold (0.999965 and 0.9999 for Simulation 1 and 2, respectively). Minus phases were 
marked by the periods following plus phases where stability was greater than the minus threshold 
(0.997465 and 0.9899 for Simulation 1 and 2, respectively). Weights were updated at the end of 
every minus phase. Weight changes were computed using a modified version of the CHL 
learning rule used in wake training (Eq1). Changes were based on the difference in average 
minus and plus phase coactivations at each synapse: 
 
Δ𝑤 = 𝜖[(𝑠!𝑟!)NNNNNNNNN − (𝑠"𝑟")NNNNNNNNN] 
 
This average allows coactivity dynamics throughout the minus phase (both high and low phases 
of inhibition) to contribute to the contrast with the plus phase. 
 
Sleep stages and simulation protocols 
NREM in both simulations involved all C-HORSE layers and the neocortical hidden 
layer being active, allowing unimpeded communication between hippocampus and neocortex. 
For REM sleep, C-HORSE and neocortex were disconnected (lesioned connection from 
entorhinal cortex to neocortex), implementing the idea that neocortex dynamics are less 
influenced by the hippocampus during REM. As we were focused on neocortical learning, C-
HORSE projections in both sleep stages were non-learning. Only input/output layer <-> 
neocortical layer projections updated during sleep. 
In Simulation 1, after the wake training criterion was achieved, the model executed one 
30,000 cycle epoch of NREM sleep. Test epochs before and after sleep established performance 
change over sleep. In the second simulation, after neocortex-only Env 1 item training and full 
model Env 2 item training, the model either performed five alternating 10,000 cycle epochs of 
NREM and REM sleep, or five 10,000 cycle epochs of consecutive NREM. Test epochs 
established performance after every sleep epoch. 
 
 
 
Acknowledgments  
 
We are grateful to James Antony, Elizabeth McDevitt, and Sharon Thompson-Schill for 
helpful discussions and Randall O’Reilly and Seth Herd for model implementation support. This 
work was supported by NIH R01 MH069456 to KAN and Charles E. Kaufman Foundation 
KA2020-114800 to ACS.  
.CC-BY 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted February 1, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.31.478475doi: bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 17 =====
17 
References 
 
1.  J. L. McClelland, B. L. McNaughton, R. C. O’Reilly, Why There Are Complementary 
Learning Systems in the Hippocampus and Neocortex: Insights From the Successes and 
Failures of Connectionist Models of Learning and Memory. Psychol. Rev. 102, 419–457 
(1995). 
2.  S. Diekelmann, J. Born, The memory function of sleep. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 11, 114–126 
(2010). 
3.  B. Rasch, J. Born, About Sleep’s Role in Memory. Physiol. Rev. 93, 681–766 (2013). 
4.  J. G. Klinzing, N. Niethard, J. Born, Mechanisms of systems memory consolidation during 
sleep. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 1598–1610 (2019). 
5.  M. Geva-Sagiv, Y. Nir, Local Sleep Oscillations: Implications for Memory Consolidation. 
Front. Neurosci. 13, 813 (2019). 
6.  J. Tamminen, J. D. Payne, R. Stickgold, E. J. Wamsley, M. G. Gaskell, Sleep Spindle 
Activity is Associated with the Integration of New Memories and Existing Knowledge. J. 
Neurosci. 30, 14356–14360 (2010). 
7.  J. Tamminen, M. A. Lambon Ralph, P. A. Lewis, The Role of Sleep Spindles and Slow-
Wave Activity in Integrating New Information in Semantic Memory. J. Neurosci. 33, 
15376–15381 (2013). 
8.  F. Xia, et al., Parvalbumin-positive interneurons mediate neocortical-hippocampal 
interactions that are necessary for memory consolidation. eLife 6, e27868 (2017). 
9.  D. Khodagholy, J. N. Gelinas, G. Buzsáki, Learning-enhanced coupling between ripple 
oscillations in association cortices and hippocampus. Science 358, 369–372 (2017). 
10.  N. K. Logothetis, et al., Hippocampal–cortical interaction during periods of subcortical 
silence. Nature 491, 547–553 (2012). 
11.  D. Ji, M. A. Wilson, Coordinated memory replay in the visual cortex and hippocampus 
during sleep. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 100–107 (2007). 
12.  H.-V. V. Ngo, T. Martinetz, J. Born, M. Mölle, Auditory Closed-Loop Stimulation of the 
Sleep Slow Oscillation Enhances Memory. Neuron 78, 545–553 (2013). 
13.  N. Maingret, G. Girardeau, R. Todorova, M. Goutierre, M. Zugaro, Hippocampo-cortical 
coupling mediates memory consolidation during sleep. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 959–964 (2016). 
14.  J. Ladenbauer, et al., Promoting Sleep Oscillations and Their Functional Coupling by 
Transcranial Stimulation Enhances Memory Consolidation in Mild Cognitive Impairment. J. 
Neurosci. 37, 7111–7124 (2017). 
15.  M. Geva-Sagiv, “Hippocampal-prefrontal neuronal synchrony during human sleep mediates 
memory consolidation” [Poster]. Presented at Society for Neuroscience (2021). 
16.  N. Ketz, A. P. Jones, N. B. Bryant, V. P. Clark, P. K. Pilly, Closed-Loop Slow-Wave tACS 
Improves Sleep-Dependent Long-Term Memory Generalization by Modulating Endogenous 
Oscillations. J. Neurosci. 38, 7314–7326 (2018). 
17.  L. R. Squire, P. Alvarez, Retrograde amnesia and memory consolidation: a neurobiological 
perspective. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 5, 169–177 (1995). 
18.  G. Winocur, M. Moscovitch, M. Sekeres, Memory consolidation or transformation: context 
manipulation and hippocampal representations of memory. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 555–557 
(2007). 
19.  L. Nadel, M. Moscovitch, Memory consolidation, retrograde amnesia and the hippocampal 
complex. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 7, 217–227 (1997). 
.CC-BY 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted February 1, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.31.478475doi: bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 18 =====
18 
20.  G. Winocur, M. Moscovitch, Memory Transformation and Systems Consolidation. J. Int. 
Neuropsychol. Soc. 17, 766–780 (2011). 
21.  M. Moscovitch, A. Gilboa, Systems consolidation, transformation and reorganization: 
Multiple Trace Theory, Trace Transformation Theory and their Competitors. PsyArXiv 
[Preprint] (2021). https:/doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/yxbrs (accessed 4 December 2021). 
22.  A. P. Yonelinas, C. Ranganath, A. D. Ekstrom, B. J. Wiltgen, A contextual binding theory of 
episodic memory: systems consolidation reconsidered. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 20, 364–375 
(2019). 
23.  J. W. Antony, A. C. Schapiro, Active and effective replay: systems consolidation 
reconsidered again. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 20, 506–507 (2019). 
24.  K. A. Norman, E. L. Newman, A. J. Perotte, Methods for reducing interference in the 
Complementary Learning Systems model: Oscillating inhibition and autonomous memory 
rehearsal. Neural Netw. 18, 1212–1228 (2005). 
25.  A. Goto, et al., Stepwise synaptic plasticity events drive the early phase of memory 
consolidation. Science 374, 857–863 (2021). 
26.  M. Friedrich, I. Wilhelm, J. Born, A. D. Friederici, Generalization of word meanings during 
infant sleep. Nat. Commun. 6, 6004 (2015). 
27.  A. C. Schapiro, et al., Sleep Benefits Memory for Semantic Category Structure While 
Preserving Exemplar-Specific Information. Sci. Rep. 7, 14869 (2017). 
28.  M. Huguet, J. D. Payne, S. Y. Kim, S. E. Alger, Overnight sleep benefits both neutral and 
negative direct associative and relational memory. Cogn. Affect. Behav. Neurosci. 19, 1391–
1403 (2019). 
29.  A. C. Schapiro, N. B. Turk-Browne, M. M. Botvinick, K. A. Norman, Complementary 
learning systems within the hippocampus: a neural network modelling approach to 
reconciling episodic memory with statistical learning. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 372, 
20160049 (2017). 
30.  Z. Zhou, D. Singh, M. C. Tandoc, A. C. Schapiro, Distributed representations for human 
inference. bioRxiv [Preprint] (2021). https:/doi.org/10.1101/2021.07.29.454337 (accessed 1 
December 2021). 
31.  N. Niethard, H.-V. V. Ngo, I. Ehrlich, J. Born, Cortical circuit activity underlying sleep slow 
oscillations and spindles. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 115, E9220–E9229 (2018). 
32.  J. Durkin, et al., Cortically coordinated NREM thalamocortical oscillations play an essential, 
instructive role in visual system plasticity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 114, 10485–10490 (2017). 
33.  R. Boyce, S. D. Glasgow, S. Williams, A. Adamantidis, Causal evidence for the role of REM 
sleep theta rhythm in contextual memory consolidation. Science 352, 812–816 (2016). 
34.  G. R. Poe, D. A. Nitz, B. L. McNaughton, C. A. Barnes, Experience-dependent phase-
reversal of hippocampal neuron firing during REM sleep. Brain Res. 855, 176–180 (2000). 
35.  D. H. Ackley, G. E. Hinton, T. J. Sejnowski, A Learning Algorithm for Boltzmann 
Machines. Cogn. Sci. 9, 147–169 (1985). 
36.  A. C. Schapiro, E. A. McDevitt, T. T. Rogers, S. C. Mednick, K. A. Norman, Human 
hippocampal replay during rest prioritizes weakly learned information and predicts memory 
performance. Nat. Commun. 9, 3920 (2018). 
37.  M. A. L. Ralph, E. Jefferies, K. Patterson, T. T. Rogers, The neural and computational bases 
of semantic cognition. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 18, 42–55 (2017). 
38.  M. T. R. van Kesteren, D. J. Ruiter, G. Fernández, R. N. Henson, How schema and novelty 
augment memory formation. Trends Neurosci. 35, 211–219 (2012). 
.CC-BY 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted February 1, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.31.478475doi: bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 19 =====
19 
39.  A. Tompary, L. Davachi, Consolidation Promotes the Emergence of Representational 
Overlap in the Hippocampus and Medial Prefrontal Cortex. Neuron 96, 228-241.e5 (2017). 
40.  L. Sun, H. Zhou, J. Cichon, G. Yang, Experience and sleep-dependent synaptic plasticity: 
from structure to activity. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 375, 20190234 (2020). 
41.  M. McCloskey, N. J. Cohen, “Catastrophic Interference in Connectionist Networks: The 
Sequential Learning Problem” in Psychology of Learning and Motivation, (Elsevier, 1989), 
pp. 109–165. 
42.  J. M. Barnes, B. J. Underwood, “Fate” of first-list associations in transfer theory. J. Exp. 
Psychol. 58, 97–105 (1959). 
43.  S. Drosopoulos, C. Schulze, S. Fischer, J. Born, Sleep’s function in the spontaneous recovery 
and consolidation of memories. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 136, 169–183 (2007). 
44.  J. M. Ellenbogen, J. C. Hulbert, R. Stickgold, D. F. Dinges, S. L. Thompson-Schill, 
Interfering with Theories of Sleep and Memory: Sleep, Declarative Memory, and 
Associative Interference. Curr. Biol. 16, 1290–1294 (2006). 
45.  B. Baran, J. Wilson, R. M. C. Spencer, REM-dependent repair of competitive memory 
suppression. Exp. Brain Res. 203, 471–477 (2010). 
46.  J. L. McClelland, B. L. McNaughton, A. K. Lampinen, Integration of New Information in 
Memory: New Insights from a Complementary Learning Systems Perspective. Philos. Trans. 
R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 375, 20190637 (2020).  
47.  J. Sučević, A. C. Schapiro, A neural network model of hippocampal contributions to 
category learning. bioRxiv [Preprint] (2022). https:/doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.12.476051 
(accessed 18 January 2022). 
48.  T. L. Hayes, et al., Replay in Deep Learning: Current Approaches and Missing Biological 
Elements. ArXiv210404132 Cs Q-Bio (2021) (January 28, 2022). 
49.  O. C. González, Y. Sokolov, G. P. Krishnan, J. E. Delanois, M. Bazhenov, Can sleep protect 
memories from catastrophic forgetting? eLife 9, e51005 (2020). 
50.  M. Welling, G. E. Hinton, “A New Learning Algorithm for Mean Field Boltzmann 
Machines” in Artificial Neural Networks — ICANN 2002, Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science., J. R. Dorronsoro, Ed. (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2002), pp. 351–357. 
51.  B. Scellier, Y. Bengio, Equilibrium Propagation: Bridging the Gap between Energy-Based 
Models and Backpropagation. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 11, 24 (2017). 
52.  R. C. O’Reilly, Biologically Plausible Error-Driven Learning Using Local Activation 
Differences: The Generalized Recirculation Algorithm. Neural Comput. 8, 895–938 (1996). 
53.  G. Girardeau, K. Benchenane, S. I. Wiener, G. Buzsáki, M. B. Zugaro, Selective suppression 
of hippocampal ripples impairs spatial memory. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 1222–1223 (2009). 
54.  R. Stickgold, M. P. Walker, Sleep-dependent memory triage: evolving generalization 
through selective processing. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 139–145 (2013). 
55.  N. Landmann, et al., The reorganisation of memory during sleep. Sleep Med. Rev. 18, 531–
541 (2014). 
56.  P. A. Lewis, S. J. Durrant, Overlapping memory replay during sleep builds cognitive 
schemata. Trends Cogn. Sci. 15, 343–351 (2011). 
57.  J. Mirković, M. G. Gaskell, Does Sleep Improve Your Grammar? Preferential Consolidation 
of Arbitrary Components of New Linguistic Knowledge. PLOS ONE 11, e0152489 (2016). 
58.  A. Hanert, F. D. Weber, A. Pedersen, J. Born, T. Bartsch, Sleep in Humans Stabilizes Pattern 
Separation Performance. J. Neurosci. 37, 12238–12246 (2017). 
59.  L. J. Batterink, C. E. Westerberg, K. A. Paller, Vocabulary learning benefits from REM after 
.CC-BY 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted February 1, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.31.478475doi: bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 20 =====
20 
slow-wave sleep. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 144, 102–113 (2017). 
60.  J. Tamminen, M. A. Lambon Ralph, P. A. Lewis, Targeted memory reactivation of newly 
learned words during sleep triggers REM-mediated integration of new memories and 
existing knowledge. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 137, 77–82 (2017). 
61.  A. Giuditta, et al., The sequential hypothesis of the function of sleep. Behav. Brain Res. 69, 
157–166 (1995). 
62.  M. Strauss, et al., Order matters: sleep spindles contribute to memory consolidation only 
when followed by rapid-eye-movement sleep. Sleep, zsac022 (2022). 
63.  E. A. McDevitt, K. A. Duggan, S. C. Mednick, REM sleep rescues learning from 
interference. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 122, 51–62 (2015). 
64. Z. Li, D. Hoiem, Learning without Forgetting. arXiv [Preprint] (2016). 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.09282 (accessed 28 January 2022). 
65.  H. Shin, J. K. Lee, J. Kim, J. Kim, Continual Learning with Deep Generative Replay. arXiv 
[Preprint] (2017). https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.08690 (accessed 30 January 2022). 
66.  G. M. van de Ven, H. T. Siegelmann, A. S. Tolias, Brain-inspired replay for continual 
learning with artificial neural networks. Nat. Commun. 11, 4069 (2020). 
67.  S.-A. Rebuffi, A. Kolesnikov, G. Sperl, C. H. Lampert, iCaRL: Incremental Classifier and 
Representation Learning. arXiv [Preprint] (2017). https://arxiv.org/abs/1611.07725 (accessed 
30 January 2022).         
68.  A. Gepperth, C. Karaoguz, A Bio-Inspired Incremental Learning Architecture for Applied 
Perceptual Problems. Cogn. Comput. 8, 924–934 (2016). 
69.  G. Tononi, C. Cirelli, Sleep and the Price of Plasticity: From Synaptic and Cellular 
Homeostasis to Memory Consolidation and Integration. Neuron 81, 12–34 (2014). 
70.  A. Sawangjit, et al., The hippocampus is crucial for forming non-hippocampal long-term 
memory during sleep. Nature 564, 109–113 (2018). 
71.  A. C. Schapiro, et al., The hippocampus is necessary for the consolidation of a task that does 
not require the hippocampus for initial learning. Hippocampus 29, 1091–1100 (2019). 
72.  E. J. Wamsley, R. Stickgold, Memory, Sleep, and Dreaming: Experiencing Consolidation. 
Sleep Med. Clin. 6, 97–108 (2011). 
73.  K. Louie, M. A. Wilson, Temporally Structured Replay of Awake Hippocampal Ensemble 
Activity during Rapid Eye Movement Sleep. Neuron 29, 145–156 (2001). 
74.  M. Schönauer, et al., Decoding material-specific memory reprocessing during sleep in 
humans. Nat. Commun. 8, 15404 (2017). 
75.  A. Tambini, L. Davachi, Persistence of hippocampal multivoxel patterns into postencoding 
rest is related to memory. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 110, 19591–19596 (2013). 
76.  A. Tambini, L. Davachi, Awake Reactivation of Prior Experiences Consolidates Memories 
and Biases Cognition. Trends Cogn. Sci. 23, 876–890 (2019). 
77.  A. C. Schapiro, T. T. Rogers, N. I. Cordova, N. B. Turk-Browne, M. M. Botvinick, Neural 
representations of events arise from temporal community structure. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 486–
492 (2013). 
78.  S. P. Jadhav, C. Kemere, P. W. German, L. M. Frank, Awake Hippocampal Sharp-Wave 
Ripples Support Spatial Memory. Science 336, 1454–1458 (2012). 
79.  L. R. Squire, L. Genzel, J. T. Wixted, R. G. Morris, Memory Consolidation. Cold Spring 
Harb. Perspect. Biol. 7, a021766 (2015). 
80.  M. G. Mattar, N. D. Daw, Prioritized memory access explains planning and hippocampal 
replay. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 1609–1617 (2018). 
.CC-BY 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted February 1, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.31.478475doi: bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 21 =====
21 
81.  X. Liu, D. Kuzum, Hippocampal-Cortical Memory Trace Transfer and Reactivation Through 
Cell-Specific Stimulus and Spontaneous Background Noise. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 13, 67 
(2019). 
82.  P. Sanda, et al., Interaction of Hippocampal Ripples and Cortical Slow Waves Leads to 
Coordinated Large-Scale Sleep Rhythm. bioRxiv [Preprint] (2019). 
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/568881v2 (accessed 3 June, 2020).  
83.  Y. Wei, G. P. Krishnan, M. Komarov, M. Bazhenov, Differential roles of sleep spindles and 
sleep slow oscillations in memory consolidation. PLOS Comput. Biol. 14, e1006322 (2018). 
84.  W. Sun, M. Advani, N. Spruston, A. Saxe, J. E. Fitzgerald, Organizing memories for 
generalization in complementary learning systems. bioRxiv [Preprint] (2021). 
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.10.13.463791v1 (accessed 29 January 2022). 
85.  A. Santoro, P. W. Frankland, B. A. Richards, Memory Transformation Enhances 
Reinforcement Learning in Dynamic Environments. J. Neurosci. 36, 12228–12242 (2016). 
86.  D. Denis, et al., The roles of item exposure and visualization success in the consolidation of 
memories across wake and sleep. Learn. Mem. 27, 451-456 (2020). 
87.  A. S. Gupta, M. A. A. van der Meer, D. S. Touretzky, A. D. Redish, Hippocampal Replay Is 
Not a Simple Function of Experience. Neuron 65, 695–705 (2010). 
88.  Y. Liu, R. J. Dolan, Z. Kurth-Nelson, T. E. J. Behrens, Human Replay Spontaneously 
Reorganizes Experience. Cell 178, 640-652.e14 (2019). 
89.  D. Kumaran, J. L. McClelland, Generalization through the recurrent interaction of episodic 
memories: A model of the hippocampal system. Psychol. Rev. 119, 573–616 (2012). 
90.  A. Roxin, S. Fusi, Efficient Partitioning of Memory Systems and Its Importance for Memory 
Consolidation. PLOS Comput. Biol. 9, 13 (2013). 
91.  T. Kitamura, et al., Engrams and circuits crucial for systems consolidation of a memory. 
Science 356, 73–78 (2017). 
92.  L. Himmer, M. Schönauer, D. P. J. Heib, M. Schabus, S. Gais, Rehearsal initiates systems 
memory consolidation, sleep makes it last. Sci. Adv. 5, eaav1695 (2019). 
93.  E. Lesburguères, et al., Early Tagging of Cortical Networks Is Required for the Formation of 
Enduring Associative Memory. Science 331, 924–928 (2011). 
94.  D. Tse, et al., Schemas and Memory Consolidation. Science 316, 76–82 (2007). 
95.  J. L. McClelland, Incorporating rapid neocortical learning of new schema-consistent 
information into complementary learning systems theory. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 142, 1190–
1210 (2013). 
96.  F. Vargha-Khadem, et al., Differential Effects of Early Hippocampal Pathology on Episodic 
and Semantic Memory. Science 277, 376–380 (1997). 
97.  B. Aisa, B. Mingus, R. O’Reilly, The Emergent neural modeling system. Neural Netw. 21, 
1146–1152 (2008). 
98.  K. A. Norman, R. C. O’Reilly, Modeling hippocampal and neocortical contributions to 
recognition memory: A complementary-learning-systems approach. Psychol. Rev. 110, 611–
646 (2003). 
99.  X. Xie, H. S. Seung, Equivalence of Backpropagation and Contrastive Hebbian Learning in a 
Layered Network. Neural Comput. 15, 441–454 (2003). 
 
 
 
 
  
.CC-BY 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted February 1, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.31.478475doi: bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 22 =====
22 
Supplementary Material 
Layer Parameters (Simulation 1) 
Layer Parameter Value 
pCA1 # Units 100 
Inhibition FFFB Gi = 2.2 
dCA1 # Units 100 
Inhibition FFFB Gi = 2.2 
DG # Units 225 
Inhibition FFFB Gi = 2.8 
CA3 # Units 144 
Inhibition FFFB Gi = 5 
Feature Layers # Units 6/3/90 (Visual/Classname/Codename) 
Inhibition FFFB Gi = 2.1/1.6/2.6 
(Visual/Classname/Codename) 
Neocortex # Units 225 
Inhibition FFFB Gi = 2.4 
Projection Parameters (Simulation 1) 
Projection Parameter Value 
Default Weight Init Distribution 0.25 - 0.75 
Default Connectivity Full 
Default Learning rate 0.05 
Feature Layers -> DG Learning rate 0.1 
Feature Layers -> DG Connectivity Sparsity 0.6 
Feature Layers -> CA3 Learning rate 0.1 
Feature Layers -> CA3 Connectivity Sparsity 0.1 
.CC-BY 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted February 1, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.31.478475doi: bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 23 =====
23 
DG -> CA3 Learning rate 0 
DG -> CA3 Connectivity Sparsity 0.1 
DG -> CA3 Weight Init Distribution 0.89 - 0.91 
CA3 -> CA3 Learning rate 0.1 
CA3 -> CA3 Weight Init Distribution 0 - 0.6 
Feature Layers <-> Neocortex Learning rate 0.0001 
 
Sleep Parameters (Simulation 1) 
Projection Parameter Value 
Feature Layers <-> Neocortex Learning rate 0.03 
Feature Layers -> DG Learning rate 0 
Feature Layers -> CA3 Learning rate 0 
CA3 ->  pCA1 Learning rate 0 
 pCA1 -> Feature Layers Learning rate 0 
Feature Layers <->  dCA1 Learning rate 0 
Synaptic Depression Inc 0.00035 
 Dec 0.00025 
 
Layer Parameters (Simulation 2) 
Layer Parameter Value 
pCA1 # Units 100 
Inhibition FFFB Gi = 2.2 
dCA1 # Units 100 
Inhibition FFFB Gi = 1.8 
.CC-BY 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted February 1, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.31.478475doi: bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 24 =====
24 
DG # Units 225 
Inhibition FFFB Gi = 2.8 
CA3 # Units 144 
Inhibition FFFB Gi = 5 
Input/Output # Units 120 
Inhibition FFFB Gi = 3.2/2.8 (Input/Output) 
Neocortex # Units 144 
Inhibition FFFB Gi = 2 
 
Projection Parameters (Simulation 2) 
Projection Parameter Value 
Default Weight Init Distribution 0.25 - 0.75 
Default Connectivity Full 
Default Learning rate 0.05 
Input -> DG Learning rate 0.1 
Input -> DG Connectivity 0.6 
Input -> CA3 Learning rate 0.1 
DG -> CA3 Learning rate 0 
DG -> CA3 Connectivity Sparsity 0.1 
DG -> CA3 Weight Init Distribution 0.89 - 0.91 
CA3 -> CA3 Learning rate 0.1 
CA3 -> CA3 Weight Init Distribution 0 - 0.6 
Input -> Neocortex Learning rate 0.05/0.0001 (Env1/Env2) 
Neocortex -> Output Learning rate 0.05/0.0001 (Env1/Env2) 
 
.CC-BY 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted February 1, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.31.478475doi: bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 25 =====
25 
 
Sleep Parameters (Simulation 2) 
Projection Parameter Value 
Input <-> Neocortex Learning rate 0.05 
Neocortex -> Output Learning rate 0.05 
 pCA1 -> Neocortex Learning rate 0 
 dCA1 -> Neocortex Learning rate 0 
Feature Layers -> DG Learning rate 0 
Feature Layers -> CA3 Learning rate 0 
CA3 ->  pCA1 Learning rate 0 
 pCA1 -> Ouput Learning rate 0 
Input <->  dCA1 Learning rate 0 
Synaptic Depression Inc 0.0009 
 Dec 0.0005 
 
.CC-BY 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted February 1, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.31.478475doi: bioRxiv preprint 